===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/10_000_bu_exam_challenge.pdf
title: 10 000 BU Exam Challenge
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“$10,000 BU Exam Challenge”                                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    I am happy to announce an exciting new Playing-Ability Exam Challenge from the Billiard University (BU).
Through the end of August 2020, players at all levels have a chance to win money in this “virtual” video-based
tournament, where there are no travel costs or entry fees ... only prize money! We are offering $10,000 total
with a possible top prize of $5000; and, again, it is free to enter! The challenge will also give you quality
dedicated practice that will help bring your game to the next level. We have an open division for top players
and a junior division for younger players. We also have a lottery division, where anybody can win money,
regardless of their playing performance. We want everybody to participate and benefit from this challenge.

     Everything you need is at the Challenge website (see Image 1) at:

                              billiards.colostate.edu/challenge/2020-bu-exam

    There you can find a list of the money prizes available, all the detailed rules of the challenge, the Exam
documents containing diagrams and detailed instructions for each drill or shot, scoresheets you can print or
complete electronically, video demonstrations of Shane VanBoening and other top players taking the exams.
and video demonstrations that help you through every step of the process.

                                        Image 1 Challenge website

Billiards Digest                                                                                     July, 2020
     There are two different main categories of the Challenge. The first is BU Exam I which tests all important
fundamental skills and measures excellence in these skills. The top divisions are to challenge pros and other
top players. The highest score on Exam I before this challenge was 95 (out of 100 possible). Anybody who
can score 96 or above, which is not easy, will split $2500. Anybody who can score 90-95, which is also very
difficult, will split $2000. The 1st place winner overall will also receive a $1000 bonus. And if that person also
achieves a perfect score of 100, he or she will receive an additional $1500 bonus. So, again, it is possible to
win $5000 total!

     To encourage participation by all, we also have a lottery division, where anybody who scores 50 or above
will be entered into a drawing for $500. The person with the number that is drawn at the end of the challenge
gets the money. Remember, it costs nothing to enter, so get to the table and start practicing so you have a
free chance at $500. A score of 50 should be easy to attain for any upper beginner or lower intermediate
player with a little exam practice.

    The second challenge category is BU Exam III which consists of a collection of advanced shots that
require special skills (see some in Image 2). For each, you get 4 points if you succeed on the 1st attempt, 2
points for the 2nd attempt, or 1 for the 3rd. The maximum possible score for perfect shooting is 100.
Diagrams for all the shots and a scoresheet are available via the BU Exam link on the website.

                                   Image 2 BU Exam III – Advanced Shots

     The BU Exam III shots are fun to learn. And these types of shots come up in game play occasionally, so
it is important to practice them periodically. If you do not believe me, check out the link on the BU Exam
website showing examples of pros executing shots like these in actual pool matches (see Image 3).

Billiards Digest                                                                                         July, 2020
                             Image 3 Pro Match Examples of Exam III Shots

     We have a separate Juniors-only division of the Exam III Challenge, sponsored by Bob Jewett. We hope
lots of junior players out there will get excited about learning and having fun with these advanced shots. And
they can win some money and respect in the process.

     We hope you enjoy and benefit from the BU Exam Challenges, and we hope you win some of our prize
money. All you need to do to enter is video record yourself taking BU Exam I or BU Exam III, post your video
for public viewing online, and send the video link and score to Dr. Dave. On the website (see Image 4), we
have video demonstrations of how to execute all the shots in both Exam I and Exam III. If you are interested
in entering the Challenge, these might be useful to watch first thing.

     Any submitted video must be a continuous, uninterrupted, and unedited run at the entire exam, and it
must be obvious there is no trickery or cheating involved. During the entire video, you must stay in the frame
of the camera, keep balls on the table during each drill (pulling them out in groups), and keep your cue on or
against the table when spotting balls and between drills. For more information, see the Detailed Rules and
Instructions on the website.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     July, 2020
                                        Image 4 Videos on website

Good luck and have fun with the Challenge,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    July, 2020
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/10_secrets_of_a_good_stroke.pdf
title: 10 Secrets Of A Good Stroke
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“10 Secrets of a Good Stroke”                                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Recently, I posted online video NV J.66 covering the generally recommended “best practices” for the
stroke. In this article, I summarize important highlights from the video. Before I begin, I want to be clear that
as long as a stroke is accurate and consistent with both direction and speed, it is a good stroke, even if you
pump your stroke with a loose wrist like Francisco Bustamante, or use a sidearm stroke with lots of “body
English” like Keith McCready, or use a short, punchy stroke with unnecessary elbow motion like Allen
Hopkins, or have a bent and locked wrist like John Schmidt (see the video for examples of each of these
stroke types). All these players are accurate and consistent, and that is all that really matters, so there would
be no reason for them to change. However, if you have trouble with stroke consistency or accuracy, it might
help to try to incorporation some of the following stroke “best practices” into your game.

1. Set and Check
     I will assume you are already in a good stance after a purposeful pre-shot routine. If you need help with
these things, see the links in the NV J.66 video description. As shown in Image 1, in the “set” position, with
the tip close to the cue ball (CB), the forearm should be perpendicular to the cue with the cue as level as
possible. If you are wondering why I crouch in my stance with bent knees, see online videos NV J.21 and NV
J.40. As shown in Image 2, the forearm should also be in a vertical plane. This will make it easier to stroke
straight. With the cue still and the tip close to the CB, carefully check visual alignment, cue direction, and tip
position. This is easier with a low stance with the chin as close to the cue as possible. Before moving the
cue, make sure everything looks good by slowly moving your eyes between the CB and object ball (OB),
giving your eyes time to focus on each.

                                            Image 1 “Set” position

Billiards Digest                                                                                       March, 2021
                                         Image 2 Vertical forearm

2. Relax and Test
   As demonstrated in NV J.66, take several slow warm-up strokes to ensure you are relaxed and settled,
and to test that your aim remains true during arm motion. You can also judge the stroke length you want
based on the desired shot speed. It is recommended you keep your eyes focused on the CB during the
warm-up strokes to make sure you do not contact the CB by mistake.

3. Pause and Verify
   After the warm-up strokes, re-check the cue alignment and tip position with the cue still, before
committing to the final stroke.

4. Focus on Target
    Now shift and lock your eye gaze from the CB to your ghost-ball or contact-point target. Give your eyes
time to settle before starting the final stroke.

5. Pull Back Slowly
   Smoothly and slowly pull back the cue and “pause” (even if only for an instant) at the end of your
backstroke. The backstroke length should generally be shorter for softer shots and longer for power shots.

6. Transition Smoothly
    Be very careful to have a smooth and non-rushed transition between the final backstroke and forward
stroke. If you have trouble with this, it can help to add a deliberate pause at the end of the backstroke. As
demonstrated in NV J.66, a jerky transition can create unwanted body motion and stroking errors. Again, go
back slow, and don’t rush the transition.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   March, 2021
7. Keep Grip Relaxed
     As illustrated in Image 3, keep your grip relaxed during the entire stroke. As demonstrated in NV J.66,
tightening the grip can lead to poor tip-contact-point accuracy, and tightening your entire arm can cause the
cue to lift. Again, keep your grip and arm relaxed during the stroke if you want to hit the CB where you are
aiming.

                                           Image 3 Relaxed grip

8. Accelerate Smoothly
    Be sure to accelerate smoothly into the CB, and follow through. This will help make your stroke more
accurate and consistent, and you will have better speed control. Sometimes people refer to this whole
process as having good “timing.” If you rush the backstroke or transition, or decelerate during the stroke into
the CB, or constrain the follow-through, you have bad “timing” and you will not have good speed control.

9. Keep Elbow Still
    If you want to be accurate with the tip contact point on the CB, you should keep the elbow still during the
stroke into the CB. If you drop your elbow, you will not hit the CB at the height you expect. It is OK to drop
the elbow if you can drop it straight and do so mostly after the hit. One problem with elbow drop for some
people is that other bad things often come with it like wrist turn and chicken-wing sideways motion. The
recommended type of stroke is called a “pendulum stroke,” where the shoulder and elbow remain still and
only the forearm moves (like a pendulum). In Image 4, the elbow at the end of the stroke is in the same
position as at the beginning and during the entire stroke, as if it were “pinned.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                    March, 2021
                                            Image 4 Pinned elbow

10. Finish the Stroke
     If you accelerate into the CB, the cue will follow through naturally. This is sometimes called “finishing the
stroke.” Even with a straight draw shot, where the CB will come back, you have plenty of time to get the cue
out of the way after finishing the stroke. If you decelerate, or slow down, during the stroke into the CB, you
will not have good speed control.

11. Stay Down and Still
      OK. I lied. There are 11 stroke “best practices,” not 10. Be sure to freeze after your stroke, keeping your
head, body, arm, and cue still and down well after impact. As demonstrated in NV J.66, do not lift up and turn
your head to watch the OB. And do not lift your body up on the shot either. Be a “relaxed statue” during and
after the shot. Some people ask: Why do I need to stay down and still if the ball is already gone? The reason
is: If you stay down and still after the shot, there is no way you will move during the shot, which can cause
problems. Remember, for best results, be a relaxed statue during and after the hit.

    I hope the advice in this article and online video NV J.66 helps you fix some stroke issues that might be
holding back your game or causing inaccuracy and inconsistency. In the video description, there is a link to a
stroke “best practices” document that concisely summarizes everything in the video. Also linked are other
useful supporting resources and related videos. Be sure to check out these resources if you want more help
with your fundamentals. Finally, if you want to learn by watching top players with excellent “best practices”
technique, watch and study match videos with Allison Fisher, Chang Jung-Lin, Chris Melling, Eklent Kaci, and
Tyler Styer (see examples of their strokes in NV J.66). These players exhibit most of the “best practices”
summarized in this article.

     Good luck with your game from Dr. Dave.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       March, 2021
                    NV J.21 – How to Find the Perfect Pool/Snooker/Billiards Stance
                    NV J.40 – Pre-Stance Routine … A New Approach
normal video        NV J.66 – 10 Secrets of a GOOD STROKE in Pool

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       March, 2021
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/10_useful_game_winning_shots_part_1.pdf
title: 10 Useful Game Winning Shots Part 1
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“10 Useful Game Winning Shots – Part 1”                                    ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Recently, I spent some time with pro player Demetrius Jelatis of the Minnesota Pool Boot Camp to record
several YouTube instructional videos together. The one I feature in this article (online video NV J.104)
presents 10 very useful game-winning shots that many people haven’t seen before. I will cover the first 5
shots here and the second 5 next month.

1. Low-Inside Kill Shot
    In Image 1, Demetrius needs to pocket the 11 and hold for a shot at the 8 in the side next for the win. To
an inexperienced player, it might seem impossible to prevent the cue ball (CB) from heading up table because
the cut is so thin. But with low-inside spin, we can kill the CB for the hold. The bottom spin helps create drag
action into the cushion, which slows the ball, and creates an angle for the inside spin to reverse off the
cushion, which helps kill the CB even more. This is a useful shot to know.

                                        Image 1 Low-Inside Kill Shot

2. Stun Forward with Running Spin
     Have you ever ended up straight in on your key ball, as shown in Image 2, needing to get up table for the
8 next? The most reliable way to do this is to stun forward with running spin off two rails. As shown by the
lines in the image, you can cheat the pocket a little if necessary to help create a small angle to send the CB
toward the 1st cushion a little. The running spin does most of the work, so you don’t need to use as much
speed as you might think.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       May, 2022
      Another option here is to draw with outside spin off the opposite long cushion, but this can be more
difficult to control in this game situation. When the object ball (OB) is close to the rail and pocket like this, a
good option is to go rail first instead with inside follow. The follow action takes the place of the ball-first
running-spin effect described above. This is probably the best option for most people in this game situation.

                                  Image 2 Stun Forward with Running Spin

3. Thick Hit Rolling Ticky
     In the situation shown in Image 3, shooting stripes, needing to pocket the 8 for the win, many people
would attempt a tangent-line ticky, kicking the CB off the end rail and thinning the 2, so the tangent line points
to the pocket. That shot works, but it requires a very accurate hit. An option with a larger margin for error is
to hit the 2 fuller (between a ¼-ball and ¾-ball hit) with slower speed to allow the 8 to roll through the ticky in
the natural angle direction. As demonstrated in the video, this shot has a much larger margin for error with
both the amount of cut and speed as compared to the tangent-line ticky.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          May, 2022
                                       Image 3 Thick Hit Rolling Ticky

4. Twice-As-Full System
     Have you ever left the CB frozen to one of your balls, as shown in Image 4, making an otherwise easy
out almost seem hopeless? Well, if you know the twice-as-full system from fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett,
you can easily recover from the mistake. Just visualize the line through the frozen balls and the desired line
to the target and aim ½-way between with a center-ball hit. Under the WPA “official rules of pool,” you are
allowed to hit into a frozen CB like this with a normal stroke since it does not result in a push or double hit.
For more information and demonstrations dealing with how to aim these types of shots in different situations,
see the “frozen ball aiming systems” resource page at billiards.colostate.edu.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       May, 2022
                                     Image 4 Twice-As-Full System

5. Frozen Rail Safety
    Image 5 shows another interesting frozen-ball shot. A good play here that many people might not
consider is a safety played with inside follow. The 8 goes up table some and the reverse spin holds the CB
close to the foot rail, leaving your opponent with only a tough bank. See the demonstration in the video.

Billiards Digest                                                                                 May, 2022
                                             Image 5 Frozen Rail Safety

    Check out online video NV J.104 to see everything in the article brought to life. And if you want to add
these useful shots to your pool arsenal, be sure to practice each of them. Demetrius and I hope you can
learn a new trick or two from the video. I’ll see you next month for shots 6-10!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.104 – Top 10 Useful GAME-WINNING SHOTS You Need to Know
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        May, 2022
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/10_useful_game_winning_shots_part_2.pdf
title: 10 Useful Game Winning Shots Part 2
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“10 Useful Game Winning Shots – Part 2”                                          ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Recently, I spent some time with pro player Demetrius Jelatis of the Minnesota Pool Boot Camp to record
several YouTube instructional videos together. The one I feature in this article presents 10 useful game-
winning shots (see online video NV J.104). Last month, I covered shots 1-5. This month, I feature shots 6-
10, plus a bonus shot.

6. Frozen Rail Cut Shot
    Rail cut shots (see Image 6), where the object ball (OB) is frozen to the cushion are common, especially
in ball-box 8-ball. This shot looks difficult, but if you hit the rail first with running spin, it is much easier than it
might seem. Although, if you are not good at adjusting your aim for cue ball (CB) deflection when using
sidespin, you will not be very successful. In the video, I use the System for Aiming With Sidespin (SAWS) to
get an accurate aim. For more information, see the SAWS resource page at billiards.colostate.edu.

    As shown by the white lines in Image 6, the CB heads in very different directions depending on the timing
of the hit. If you hit the OB first, the running spin takes after hitting the ball, causing the CB to go more
forward. If you hit the cushion first, the running spin will take before hitting the ball and the CB will come off
closer to the tangent line. If you hit the OB and cushion close to the same time, the CB will go somewhere in
between the two directions shown. If you are worried about scratching, you can add backspin to help prevent
the CB from going forward. The running spin, cushion-first technique works even at very steep angles. As
demonstrated in the video, with a little practice, you can even reverse-cut the ball with a cut angle greater
than 90˚.

                                          Image 6 Frozen Rail Cut Shot

Billiards Digest                                                                                               June, 2022
7. Small Gap Rail Cut Safety
    In Image 7, the OB is off the cushion a little. In this case, the previous technique can be used, but the
shot is a lot tougher. It is easy to sell out the game if the aim isn’t perfect. A better approach here might be to
play safe. You just need to aim to barely miss the 8 for a rail-first hit. As demonstrated in the video, the shot
can result in a good safety, with distance between the balls and no easy bank.

                                     Image 7 Small Gap Rail Cut Safety

8. Avoiding a Bank Shot Double Kiss
     With the cross-side bank shot shown in Image 8, a double kiss is a concern. If you hit this shot at the
correct angle to pocket the 8, the 8 will kiss the CB after rebound. Many people would try to avoid the double
kiss by using speed to shorten the bank, allowing for a bigger cut, but this technique is not very effective with
this ball layout. Although, a creative option is to go three-times across, as demonstrated in the video.

    A much better approach is to use transferred spin to shorten the bank. Right spin on the CB transfers left
spin to the 8, which makes it bank short, allowing for a bigger cut for the 8 to clear the CB after rebound. You
don’t want or need fast speed or a lot of spin here. Spin transfer is more effective at slower speed with a
medium amount of spin. With a little practice, this shot is very easy to execute.

    When this technique still doesn’t give you enough room for the OB to clear, especially when the OB is
closer to the rail, another approach is to hop the OB over the CB. You just need to elevate the back of the
cue a little to hop the CB into the OB, which makes it hop into the cushion nose, allowing it to easily clear over
the CB. Another option, which isn’t as good, but is fun to try anyway, is to jump the CB more so the OB can
clear underneath the CB. This technique can work even if the OB is frozen to the cushion. Both approaches
are demonstrated in the video. The OB-hop-over-the-CB technique is not very practical in game situations,
but it is a fun proposition or trick shot. Hopping the OB over the CB is much easier and more effective as a
practical game-situation shot.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         June, 2022
                                 Image 8 Avoiding a Bank Shot Double Kiss

9. Avoid Double Hit with Jump Cue
     Image 9 shows a situation, shooting stripes, where a double-hit foul is a concern since the CB is so close
to the OB (the stripe behind the 8). Demetrius would like to hold the CB behind the 8 for a safety, but he also
needs to drive the OB to the rail for the shot to be legal. Many people would try to elevate the cue to attempt
this shot, but it is difficult to control. It is also easy to double hit the ball, which is a foul. On the double hit
fouls resource page at billiards.colostate.edu., I show many ways to avoid and detect double hits, but a
good approach with this shot is to use your jump cue. Because the jump cue is so light, if you use a short
stroke, it is very easy to avoid the double hit. It helps to use a loose grip and wrist, holding the cue in your
fingertips. With the CB frozen to the 8 after the hit, your opponent shooting solids is in big trouble.

                                  Image 9 Avoid Double Hit with Jump Cue

Billiards Digest                                                                                           June, 2022
10. “Tin Man” Double Frozen Rail Send
    Image 10 shows another frozen-ball shot I learned from Demetrius (AKA “Tin Man” on AZBilliards) many
years ago. You are playing 8-ball, shooting solids, and you‘re on the 8. Both balls are frozen to each other
and the cushion. The “Tin Man” option is to use inside spin, hitting the 8 and cushion at very nearly the same
time. In the video, super-slow-motion replay clearly shows the CB hitting the 8 with the CB barely in contact
with the cushion. As the CB compresses the cushion, the sidespin takes, causing the CB to push the 8
forward after the 11 is already gone.

                                Image 10 “Tin Man” Double Frozen Rail Send

BONUS SHOT – Frozen Proposition Shot
    I’ll end with another frozen ball shot shown in Image 11. This is a proposition shot suggested to me by
Jay Helfert. The 13 is on the foot spot and the 11 is frozen behind it. The proposition is: Putting the CB
anywhere you want without moving the OBs, pocket the 11 directly into the corner pocket with a legal hit.
Can you figure out how to do it? Spoiler Alert … here comes the answer. The trick is to freeze the CB to the
side of the 13 and stroke toward the 11 as if the 13 were not there. Under the WPA “official rules of pool,” you
are allowed to hit into a frozen CB with a normal stroke. This shot would not work like this if the balls were not
frozen.

      The shot is very difficult if the CB does not start frozen to the 13. With the CB frozen, it can go forward of
the tangent line off the 13, allowing for the required timed secondary hit on the 11. That helps the shot go a
little straighter than it would otherwise. Now, you need to use a short stroke. Otherwise, you will double hit
the CB, which would be a foul. In online video NV J.105, I demonstrate 35 different options for dealing with
this frozen-ball situation. I love when a simple setup like this can result in so many options and so much
creativity.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          June, 2022
                                          Image 11 Frozen Proposition Shot

    Check out online video NV J.104 to see everything in the article brought to life. And if you want to add
these useful shots to your pool arsenal, be sure to practice each of them. Demetrius and I hope you can
learn a new trick or two from the video.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.104 – Top 10 Useful GAME-WINNING SHOTS You Need to Know
normal video
                    NV J.105 – FROZEN BALL Spot-Shot OPTIONS

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        June, 2022
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/10_ways_to_avoid_a_double_hit_foul.pdf
title: 10 Ways To Avoid A Double Hit Foul
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“10 Ways to AVOID A DOUBLE HIT Foul”                                        ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     In a recent online video (NV J.106), I covered how to detect various fouls and showed examples of bad
calls in pro tournament matches. In a follow-up video (NV J.107), I demonstrate 10 useful ways to avoid a
double-hit foul when the gap between the cue ball (CB) and object ball (OB) is small. I summarize these
techniques below.

1. Angled Hit
    When the gap between the CB and OB is very small, the most reliable way to avoid a double hit is to
shoot the CB at an angle. As long as the CB starts off in the tangent-line direction (see Image 1), the shot is
legal.

                                   Image 1 Angled Hit with Tangent Line

2. Short Bridge and Stroke
    When the ball gap is not too small, one relatively easy way to avoid a double hit is to use a short bridge
length and short stroke.

3. Elevated Cue
     Again, when the gap is not too small, it can be easy to avoid a double hit simply by elevating the back of
the cue. But as demonstrated in online video NV J.107, even a highly elevated cue is no guarantee of a legal
hit. Do not let anybody tell you after attempting an elevated draw shot with a small gap, with the CB going
well forward of the OB: “I elevated the cue, and the CB drew back, so it isn’t a foul!” If they want to argue with
you, tell them to watch the video.

    Even when the gap is really small, a double hit can still be avoided with cue elevation and bottom spin,
but the cue needs to be nearly vertical during the stroke.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         July, 2022
4. Tight Grip or Bridge
    When the gap is small and the OB distance to the pocket is short, you might be able to get a good hit by
holding the tip close to the CB and just tightening the grip (in lieu of a stroke), which can provide slight forward
motion of the tip. Another option is to use a firm grip on the shaft with a tight closed-bridge hand to limit cue
motion. When you attempt your normal stroke motion, the locked bridge hand will flex and shift a little,
allowing the cue to move forward only a small distance.

5. Reverse Stroke
    For shots that are difficult to reach, a good option is a reverse stroke as shown in Image 2. First position
the cue on the table pointing in the required direction to pocket the ball, with the tip close to the CB. Then
form a bridge close to the CB and grip the cue with your fingers close to the bridge. The bridge hand, which
should be firmly planted on the table, will stop the forward motion of the cue to prevent a double hit. As
demonstrated in online video NV J.107, you can even control the CB with follow or draw using this technique.

                                     Image 2 Reverse Stroke Technique

6. Rail Hand Stop
    Another technique to avoid a double hit is to use your grip hand to stop the stroke against the rail. First
position the tip close to the CB and then slide your grip hand forward so it is touching the rail (see Image 3).
Then attempt to stroke into the CB with a normal stroke, with the grip hand knuckles stopping the stroke
against the rail. It might hurt a little, but it works like a charm. Again, as demonstrated in the video, you can
even control the CB with follow or draw using this technique.

Billiards Digest                                                                                           July, 2022
                                    Image 3 Knuckle-Buster Technique

7. Sidespin
    When using sidespin, it is much easier to avoid a double hit with an inside-spin shot. Image 4 shows an
example inside-follow shot being used to get shape on the 8 up table. The double hit is easy to avoid here
since the CB is coming off the OB in the opposite direction as the tip is coming off the CB. It is more difficult
to avoid a double hit with an outside spin shot, where the cue tip motion is starting in the same direction the
CB is heading off the OB.

                             Image 4 Inside Follow Double Hit Avoid Example

     Another sidespin technique that can be used to avoid a double hit while getting significant CB speed is a
fouetté or whip shot. In online video NV J.107, extreme bottom-right spin is being used, allowing the tip end
of the shaft to flex away from the CB as the CB clears a possible double hit with significant draw. See the
video for supper-slow-motion video footage of several examples.

8. Use Light Grip and Wrist
   Another good approach for avoiding a double hit with a small gap is to use a jump cue. Because most
jump cues are light, if you use a short stroke, it can be easy to avoid a double hit. It helps to use a really

Billiards Digest                                                                                        July, 2022
loose finger-tip grip with lots of wrist action to limit how much the cue can move forward. The light weight of
the jump cue limits how far it moves forward after the hit since most of the speed is delivered to the CB.

9. Near Horizontal Forearm
    Another technique you might prefer is choking up on the cue, with the forearm almost horizontal, where
the cue won’t advance much with a regular pendulum-stroke motion (see Image 5). The hand comes up
more than forward to limit the follow-through. As demonstrated in the video, a related technique is to use your
chest or the end of travel of your elbow joint to limit the forward motion of the cue.

                                        Image 5 Choked-Up Technique

10. Really Light Cue
     A creative way to avoid a small-gap double hit is to use a super light cue. In online video NV J.107,, I’ve
extended my jump-cue shaft with a paper towel tube I slit, cut and taped to the joint to make the “cue” satisfy
the required minimum length of 40 inches. The total weight is about 4 oz, which is lighter than the CB (6 oz).
Therefore, with a light grip and wristy fingertip stroke, or by just hitting the “butt” of the “cue” with your hand,
the “cue” will bounce back from the CB and easily avoid the double hit. If you don’t like the paper-towel-roll
idea, you could instead make a short and light cue out of a thin aluminum, fiberglass, or carbon fiber tube or
solid balsa wood.

     I hope you learned something from the 10 ways to avoid a double-hit foul. I also hope you can use some
or all the techniques in various game situations. Maybe the shots will help you win some games. If you want
to learn more about any of the techniques, or see more demonstrations, check out the links in the YouTube
video description of NV J.107.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV J.106 – BAD CALLS in Pool … FOULS that Weren’t Called
normal video
                   NV J.107 – 10 Useful Ways to AVOID A DOUBLE HIT Foul

Billiards Digest                                                                                           July, 2022
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    July, 2022
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/30_degree_rule_for_caroms.html
title: 30-Degree Rule for Caroms - December 2009
topics: collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
30-Degree Rule for Caroms - December 2009 - Tom Ross
Free Billiard Library > Tom Ross > 30-Degree Rule for Caroms - December 2009
30-Degree Rule for Caroms - December 2009
Throughout The
Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots, a project that I recently completed in
collaboration with Billiards Digest columnist, Dr. Dave Alciatore, we demonstrate many
applications for the 30-Degree rule and Dr. Daves famous peace-sign technique
for predicting cue ball and object ball paths over a broad range of cut angles.
So far in our discussion of the rule here weve seen how to apply it for
accurate position play and to avoid scratches. Now we can move on to another
useful application and one that will help win many games, particularly in 9 Ball.
As a review, for cut angles that range from
ball to ball hits on the object ball, a naturally rolling cue ball will
deflect from the object ball on a path that is roughly 30 degrees away from its
path toward the object ball. Certain cut angles yield a slightly smaller angle
while others yield a slightly larger angle. Across the range of cut angles
however the average cue-ball deflection is 30 degrees. And, for shots where the
angle is slightly smaller or greater, the difference is small enough to make a
reliable prediction for the cue ball with the 30-degree rule.
Often in 9 Ball we encounter opportunities to win the game
early with a combination or carom shot on the 9 Ball. Of course those shots are
useful in all pool games but 9 Ball is the game where they offer the most
dramatic advantage since a successful conversion can win the game. For that
reason we will confine our discussion to a 9-Ball context.
In the diagram we see two shots that offer carom
opportunities to win the game. With only two balls on the table for each shot
its easy to imagine them as the 8 and 9. However, each solid ball that you
see can be any ball in the rack. The earlier in the rack that an opportunity
arises to sink the 9 ball, the more sense it makes to consider going for it. For
our purpose two balls work for each shot to illustrate the principles without
cluttering the diagram. In Shot A
we see a very tempting carom on the 9, especially with no good shot on the solid
ball. But how do know where to hit that solid? With a normal, 30-degree peace
sign we can answer that question. For a shot like this one lay your peace sign
next to the solid ball as shown and rotate it until your middle finger points on
the line the cue ball must take to pocket the 9 ball. Then look at where your
index finger points to find the aiming line for the cue ball. Aim along that
line with natural, forward roll and somewhat gentle speed to pocket the 9 ball.
Shot A also offers a combination shot but most experienced players would choose
the carom for one important reason. Missing the combination can leave both balls
together near the pocket and an easy combo for the opponent. Carom shots always
separate the object ball from the 9 ball allowing us to avoid that disastrous
possibility.
Shot B is similar except for one major detail.
Here we have ball in hand and can employ the peace sign to determine the best
placement for the cue ball. Naturally if that solid ball were the 8, the shooter
with ball in hand would opt for the easy two-ball run out, so imagine other
balls on the table for this one. Lay your peace sign as shown with the middle
finger pointing along the line to game winner. Then look at where a line coming
backwards from the index finger would point, as shown with the dashed line in
the diagram. Place the cue ball on that line far enough from the object ball for
the cue ball to develop full, natural roll before contact. Once again aim along
that line with an above center hit and slow to medium speed.
Both shots in the diagram are pocketed with close
to a half-ball hit on the object ball. However, success does not demand perfect
accuracy because the natural 30-degree roll occurs across a range of cut angles.
Spend some time practicing the shots you see here and others like them to
calibrate your peace sign and become comfortable with the technique. Also, a
little experimentation will uncover the most reliable speed for various shots.
With the 30-Degree Rule and a little practice you will be shooting caroms
accurately and confidently in no time all.
The
Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots is the most comprehensive collection of
pool shots ever published with over 750 different shots in 50 categories. On
Disc I we demonstrate and describe a few dozen different caroms and kiss shots
employing the 30-Degree Rule and other techniques for accurate execution of
these very useful shots.
For a
30-Degree Template to Calibrate Your Peace Sign:
http://billiards.colostate.edu/
Click on Instructor and Student Resources then
scroll down to Templates and Diagrams where you will find the 30-Degree Rule
Angle Template.
Need Help? 24 Hour Response M-F
Monthly Newsletter
Customer Service
Do you have questions about your
order, shipping status or returns or do you need information on
our products or about placing an order with us email us at sales@ozonebilliards.com
Sign Up for
our free monthly email newsletter which includes articles from Tom Ross, Certified Billiard Instructor
and other great information about new products and special offers.
Enter
Email Address
En Espanol
Si tiene preguntas en espanol
mande correo electronico a espanol@ozonebilliards.com
Home
| Info
| Shopping Cart
| Billiard Supplies
| Shipping Info
| Privacy
Policy | Site Index
Check Out Some of Our Most Popular Items
Pool
Balls
| Pool Table Lights
| Cue Racks
| Pool Table
Felt | Pool Cue Cases
| Viking Cues
| | Lucasi
Cues
| McDermott Cues
| Cuetec Cues | Predator Cues
| Scorpion Cues
| Joss Cues
| Meucci Cues
Copyright 2001-Present Ozone Billiards, Inc.
Free Billiard Library > Tom Ross > 30-Degree Rule for Caroms - December 2009
30-Degree Rule for Caroms - December 2009
Free articles, new product info & special offers
About Us
Customer Service
Shopping Cart
Clearance
Billiard Supplies
Pool Cues by Brand
Pool Cues by Price
Pool Cue Cases
Pool Balls
Pool Ball Racks
Cue Racks & Holders
Pool Cue Accessories
Pool Table Accessories
Pool Table Felt
Pool Table Lights
Billiards Books & DVDs
Clothing & Apparel
Specialty Items
Billiard Posters & Signs
Bar Stools
Pub Tables
Dart Supplies
Table Tennis
Customer Service
My Account
Order Status
Wish List
Ozone Rewards
Billiard Supplies Pool Cues by BrandPool Cues by PricePool BallsPool Cue CasesDart SuppliesDart Boards
HomeNew ProductsBest SellersClearanceEngrave On CuesFree Billiard LibraryPool On TVCustomer Feedback
What Our Customers Say
Read more...
Best Sellers
- Yahoo Store Design
.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/8_ball_break_stats.pdf
title: 8 Ball Break Stats
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
8-Ball Break Stats                                                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
by David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Over the last nine months, I wrote about the wonderful game of 8-ball based on principles and shots from the
“Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB),” a five-disc instructional-DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards
Digest columnist Bob Jewett. This month, I want to present some interesting statistics dealing with the 8-ball
break. In high-level 8-ball, the break shot is critically important, so it can be helpful to know which practices might
be best.

     Recently, I viewed a large collection of online YouTube match videos to determine break effectiveness of the
best 8-ball pro players. I looked only at final and semi-final matches of competitive men-only bar-table events to
get stats for the best players. The tournaments from which I collected data were the 2014 US Bar Table 8-Ball
Championship, the 2015 US Open 8-Ball Championship, the 2015 US Bar Table 8-Ball Championship, the 2016
Chinook Winds 8-Ball Open, and the 2016 Wyoming Open (Saratoga) 8-Ball Championship. The players involved
included Shane Van Boening, Darren Appleton, Skyler Woodward, Corey Deuel, Rodney Morris, Dennis Orcollo,
Justin Bergman, Jeffrey Ignacio, Mike Dechaine, and others among the best in the game. The total number of
games reviewed was 169. 118 (70%) of those were 1st-ball power breaks and 51 (30%) were 2nd-ball breaks. A
racking template was used in 105 (62%) of the 169 games.

     Have you heard anecdotal statements like the following?

                                 “The pros make a ball on the break almost every time.”

                     “A 2nd-ball break is only for people who can’t hit a good 1st-ball power break.”

                                    “A racking template makes the game too easy.”

                                            “The break is a huge advantage.”

    Well, the problem with anecdotal statements like these is they are often based on uniformed opinions and
hearsay, and sometimes have no correlation with actual facts. That’s why I wanted to analyze actual results, to
help bust some of the break myths out there.

     Table 1 summarizes some of the data from my study. As you would expect, the top 8-ball pros make a ball
on the break a large percentage of the time (about 80% of the time). For the matches I included in the study, both
the 1st-ball and 2nd-ball breaks were nearly equal regarding ball pocketing; although, the 2 nd-ball break had a slight
edge (82.4% vs. 80.5%). Interestingly, the use of a racking template didn’t seem to help like one might expect. In
fact, for the matches I included, the player was actually slightly more likely to pocket a ball without using a racking
template (85.9% vs. 78.1%). As you would expect, top pros don’t scratch on the break very often; although, a
scratch did occur more often with a 1st-ball power break as compared to a 2nd-ball break (7.6% vs. 2.0%).
Scratching on the break against a top player is a fatal mistake. Even if the player can’t run out, they can choose
the best ball group (stripes or solids), and will always be a favorite to win. I didn’t have enough data to reliably
back up this claim, but it seems reasonable (although, one should be careful when making anecdotal claims like
this). One advantage of a 2nd-ball break is that it usually results in good 8 ball motion, and sometimes the 8 will
be pocketed on the break. The data showed this happening 5.9% of the time (vs. 0.8% for a 1 st-ball break). If
you play under rules where making the 8 on the break is a win (e.g., in the APA league system), the 2 nd-ball break
might be a good option because of the huge potential payoff of winning on the break.

                                           Table 1 Ball-on-Break Stats

                              made ball on break with 1st-ball break                80.5%

Billiards Digest                                                                                           August, 2016
                            made ball on break with 2nd-ball break                82.4%
                          made ball on break using racking template               78.1%
                         made ball on break not using racking template            85.9%
                                  scratched on 1st-ball break                     7.6%
                                 scratched on 2nd -ball break                     2.0%
                                 made 8 ball on 1st-ball break                    0.8%
                                made 8 ball on 2nd -ball break                    5.9%

      Table 2 lists some addition data from the study. This data is important because it involves whether or not the
breaker wins. The data shows that top pros win the game about 60% of the time when they break, and it doesn’t
matter too much which ball they target or whether or not they use a racking template. I would bet most people
would predict a much higher breaker win percentage than 60%, but that is still an important advantage, especially
for the lag-winning breaker on the final hill-hill game of the match. For the matches I included in the study, the
2nd-ball break actually had a slightly higher win percentage than the 1 st-ball break (60.8% vs. 58.5%). And the
racking template had practically no effect on the breaker win percentage. The break-and-run (B&R) data was a
little surprising. The 2nd-ball break resulted in more B&Rs (56.9% vs. 51.7%). This is counterintuitive because the
1st-ball break usually results in a better ball spread. The racking template B&R results were also a little
counterintuitive, with the B&R percentage being higher when not using a racking template (56.3% vs. 51.4%).
One would expect a racking template to result in a better break, with a greater chance of making a ball and a
more-consistent ball spread, but the data did not show this.

                                           Table 2 Breaker Win Stats

                                breaker won after 1st-ball break               58.5%
                                breaker won after 2nd-ball break               60.8%
                              breaker won using racking template               59.0%
                            breaker won not using racking template             59.4%
                               break-and-run after 1st-ball break              51.7%
                               break-and-run after 2nd-ball break              56.9%
                             break-and-run using racking template              51.4%
                           break-and-run not using racking template            56.3%

     Were you surprised by any of the results, especially the ones that disproved some of the common
misconceptions and myths we often hear? I certainly was. If you like this sort of data, many more detailed break
statistics for 8-ball, 9-ball, and 10-ball events can be found on the “break statistics” resource page in the FAQ
section at billiards.colostate.edu. And if you want to see some video demos and read advice for achieving the
best break possible, see the “break technique and equipment advice” resource page in the FAQ section at
billiards.colostate.edu.

     Regardless of which break you use, the most important factor is to be as accurate and consistent as possible
with the hit. You should think about keeping track of your own stats for different breaks on different tables to
methodically determine what works best for you. I did this for myself recently and got similar results as the pro
data … my 1st-ball power break and 2nd-ball breaks were nearly equally effective, with the 2nd-ball break offering a
slight advantage. I was sure the data would show my 1st-ball power break coming out on top, because it seems
more impressive and I seem to make multiple balls on the break often; however, the scientific data did not confirm
what I mistakenly believed (or wanted to believe). I think I’m going to work more on practicing and perfecting my
2nd-ball break. Not only does it produce slightly better results, but it is also much gentler on my elbow. Although,
on second thought, even though the data shows that a 2 nd-ball break might offer a slight advantage, the 1st-ball
power break is more fun, and it feels “manlier” to crush the rack, so maybe I won’t change after all. I hope you
are more logical than I am concerning break shot selection.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         August, 2016
Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   I am happy to announce that my entire collection of instructional DVDs (23 total to date) is now available
          for streaming via YouTube. For more info, see: dr-dave-billiards.com/stream.html.
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
          with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
          the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the Video Encyclopedias of “Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Pool Practice (VEPP),” and “Eight Ball
(VEEB),” and the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS)” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD
series, all available at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          August, 2016
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/90_degree_and_30_degree_rule_follow_up_part_i.pdf
title: 90/30 Degree Rule Follow-up - Part I
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                        ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“90/30 Degree Rule Follow-up – Part I”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV 3.4) help you locate the resources on the website.
You might also want to view the resources from a CD-ROM. See the website for more details.

       Since my book (“The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”) came out, and since my
articles started appearing in BD, I have received many supportive comments, remarks, and
questions. That’s one of the joys of being an author. Many of the questions have involved the 90
degree and 30 degree rules. Because of this, I have decided to write another series of articles
answering these questions for the benefit of all readers. In this article, I just want to answer a few
of the more basic questions and respond to some of the more general remarks. In future articles,
I’ll look at the important effects of English and speed on the 90 and 30 degree rules. FYI, my first
set of articles dealing with the 90 and 30 degree rules appeared in the January through June,
2004 issues of BD. As with all of my past articles and resources, you can access them online at
billiards.colostate.edu.

     For reference, Diagrams 1 and 2 summarize the 90 and 30 degree rules. Remember, the 90
degree rule applies only for a stun shot, where the cue ball is sliding at object ball impact, and the
30 degree rule applies only when the cue ball is rolling at object ball impact (see my July, 2004
article for more details). The 90 degree rule (see NV 3.4, NV 3.5, NV 3.6, and TP 3.1) states that
the angle between the cue ball and object paths, after impact, is 90 degrees (i.e., the two paths
are perpendicular). The 30 degree rule (see NV 3.8, NV 3.9, NV 3.10, and TP 3.3) states that,
when the cue ball is rolling at impact, and the ball-hit fraction is between 1/4 and 3/4 (see the side
view in Diagram 2), the cue ball’s angle gets deflected by approximately 30 degrees.

                                                       90°
                           (a) small cut

                                                         impact
                                                           line
                                                                        the deflected
                                                                       object ball and
                                                       90°
                                                                       cue ball paths
                         (b) medium cut                                 are 90º apart
                                                          tangent
                                                            line

                                                       90°

                           (c) large cut

                                  Diagram 1 The 90 degree rule
                  NV 3.4 – 90° rule with various cut angles
                  NV 3.5 – Using your hand to visualize the 90° rule impact and tangent lines
normal video      NV 3.7 – Using the 90° rule to check for and prevent a scratch

                  TP 3.1 – 90° rule
technical proof

                                                     the cue ball path is deflected by
                                                     approximately 30º in each case

                                                    medium                        small
                       large                       cut angle                    cut angle
                     cut angle
                                       ~30º                        ~30º                        ~30º

                            1/4                                   1/2              3/4

         top view:

      side view:
  (looking along the
     aiming line)
                                 1/4                        1/2                          3/4
                           a) 1/4-ball hit            b) 1/2-ball hit             c) 3/4-ball hit

                                       Diagram 2 The 30 degree rule

                  TP 3.3 – 30° rule
technical proof

                  NV 3.8 – Using your hand to visualize the 30° rule
                  NV 3.9 – 30° rule example
normal video      NV 3.10 – Using the 30° rule to check for and prevent a scratch

   The remainder of the article summarizes some of the more interesting and pertinent
questions I have received to date concerning the 90 and 30 degree rules, along with my replies.
Question:
Is the 30-degree rule exact? In other words, does the cue ball deflect at exactly 30 degrees?

Answer:
    No, the 30-degree rule is not exact. For a half-ball hit, the deflected angle is actually 33.7
degrees, and for 1/4- and 3/4-ball hits, the deflected angle is 27.3 degrees. But the reason why
the rule is so useful is that the deflected angle is still very close to 30 degrees over this very large
range of cut angles from a fairly thin hit to a fairly full hit (see Diagram 2). Because of this, the
rule applies to many shots. For a good player executing good position control, leaving natural
angles on each shot, the 30 degree rule applies for almost every shot! Example uses of the 30
degree rule include planning and predicting cue ball motion for:

        position play
        safeties
        carom and billiard shots
        break-up shots
        avoidance shots

I have given examples of some of these in my past articles, and others appear in my book.

Question:
Does the 30-degree rule apply only for a half-ball hit?

Answer:
    No. The whole point of the 30-degree rule, and the reason why it is so useful, is that it
applies over a very large range of cut angles. As long as the cue ball is rolling (i.e., not sliding) at
object ball impact, the cue ball's direction will be deflected by very close to 30 degrees for cut
angles ranging from a 1/4-ball hit to a 3/4 ball hit (see Diagram 2).

Question:
Out of curiosity, how will knowing all this stuff make me a better player? To me pool begins and
ends with execution. In fact, most is played on the subconscious level. Once you start with all
that messing with where to hit the ball or over thinking and conscious play you begin to dog it and
your game will go into the toilet. I can appreciate what you are trying to do, but much of it is a lot
of unnecessary information in my opinion.

Answer:
    Your point is well taken. Many players do not benefit from knowing and trying to apply
principles. Some just plain don’t want to know (but I doubt they would be reading this article).
Also, nothing can beat solid (and valid) intuition built from years of practice, experience, and
success. However, I think the 30 degree rule can dramatically improve the games of many
people. I think it can also help inexperienced players learn faster, without having to go through
years of “intuition-building” trail and error. I do agree that a player must first have solid
fundamentals and be able to pocket routine shots with ease. It is not worth thinking about
position play and where the cue ball will go if one is going to miss easy shots. Personally, the 30
degree rule, when I began to understand how to apply it, helped bring my game to a new level. I
am a much better player with the 30 degree rule than I was without it. I think this can also be the
case for others. I think knowledge and understanding of principles can be a good thing. That’s
the whole point of my “Illustrated Principles” articles.

Question:
The 30 degree rule: There is no such thing. What you are describing is what you think you see.
Physics states that when 2 spheres collide, assuming equal mass, they will diverge or come apart
at 90 degrees. Always!!!!!!!!! By even mentioning this 30 degree theory goes against physics and
is incorrect. You should make that clear that the spin on the ball takes effect on the 90 degree
line and takes it across that line at certain increments depending on speed and spin.

Here’s another:

Physicist that I have talked to say the 90 degree rule applies on every shot. In other words, the
cue ball always leaves along the tangent line, perpendicular to the direction of the object ball. I
think your 30 degree rule violates the laws of physics.

Answer:
     Your physicist friends are partly correct. The cue ball always does start out in the tangent line
direction after impact with the object ball (in the 90 degree direction). However, topspin (e.g.,
from forward roll or a follow shot) starts taking effect immediately. For high-speed shots, the cue
ball persists along the tangent line longer before the path curves. However, for slow to medium
speed shots, the cue ball curves away from the tangent line very quickly (almost immediately for
many shots). Again, for a good player executing good position control, leaving natural angles on
each shot, the 30 degree rule applies for almost every shot! If you are still not convinced, see the
online video demonstrations (NV 3.8, NV 3.9, NV 3.10) of the 30 degree rule in action.

    Also, regardless of how long the cue path persists along the tangent line, the final deflected
angle is still very close to 30 degrees for all rolling shots. I will present more details on and
examples of this in future articles.

    Concerning the 30 degree rule violating the laws of physics, I know of two PhD physics
professors that would take offense at that statement. They prove the basis of the rule
mathematically with valid physical principles (see TP 3.3 and the supporting paper on my website
for more information). They also back up their claims with photographic evidence.

Question:
I was noticing that if you look at the 90 degree rule in the same way as the 30 degree rule -- that
is, measuring from the aim line to the deflected path -- the 90 degree rule could actually be called
a 45 degree rule. (I realize the traditional "tangent line" discussion is the 90 degree rule.) The 90
degree rule looks at deflection path vs. object path; but if you look at it as aim line vs. deflection, it
is 45 degrees (for that 1/4 to 3/4 ball cuts range.) Just thought I would mention that. Seems to
me if both rules are presented with the same "point of reference" -- the aim line -- they might be
easier to remember.

Answer:
    Thank you for your message and for your insights. I wish what you propose would work in
every case, but unfortunately it does not. The 90 degree rule predicts a 45 degree cue ball
deflection only for a cut angle close to 45 degrees (for a ball-hit fraction close to 0.3). For a very
small cut-angle shot (e.g., Diagram 1a), the deflected angle is much larger than 45 degrees
(closer to 90 degrees). And for a thin cut (e.g., Diagram 1c), the deflected angle is very small
(closer to zero). In fact, for every cut angle, including those in the 1/4 and 3/4 ball-hit range, the
deflected cue ball angle varies quite a bit; but the angle between the deflected cue ball and object
ball paths is always 90 degrees (for a stun shot). I hope that makes sense.

Question:
How can a train my hand to take the 30 degree shape you show in your videos?

Answer:
     I used a plastic 30-60-90 triangle (see NV 3.8) to practice to the point where I can form a 30
degree "V" sign with my hand very consistently. For most people, a firm "V" ("peace") sign is very
close to 30 degrees, but it is still good to practice. You can purchase a drafting triangle at any
arts supplies store or college bookstore. You can also make your own by cutting one out of
cardboard or paper (see the proportions shown in Diagram 3). To cut one out, you can use the
following dimensions:

                                   triangle width = 1 foot (30 cm)

                                 triangle height = 7 inches (17 cm)

These dimensions result in a triangle with one angle being approximately 30 degrees ... or, at
least, close enough for application of the 30 degree rule, which is not perfectly exact anyway.

                                                        0.6
                                     30°

                                    1
                                                  proportions for making
                                                   your own 30° triangle
                                              (e.g., by cutting it out of paper)

                        Diagram 3 30 degree angle triangle proportions

   In subsequent articles, I will specifically look at the effects of speed and English on the 90
and 30 degree rules. I have received many questions and comments concerning these topics.

Good luck with your game, and practice hard,
Dr. Dave

PS:
        •   I recently created some discussion threads for my “Illustrated Principles” articles on
            the online Billiards Digest Discussion Forum. Feel free to post additional questions
            or comments there. To view the discussion, go to www.billiardsdigest.com, and click
            on the “Discussion Forum” button, and then click on “Cue Chalk Board.” I encourage
            you to join in on the discourse; however, proceed at your own risk. I don’t
            recommend participation unless you have thick skin. Some forum participants are
            quite colorful and not always polite and respectful. Regardless, I think the forum is a
            wonderful place for cultivating and sharing ideas and for learning. Many participants
            are very knowledgeable and insightful and have years of experience they are willing
            to share with others.
        •   If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can
            access them online at billiards.colostate.edu.
        •   FYI, over the next three years I will be presenting a multimedia seminar across the
            country, sponsored by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. The title is
            “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards.” The talks are usually open to the
            public, so periodically check out the dates and locations on my website. It would be
            fun to have some BD readers (and not just engineers) in the audience. The talk is
            geared toward a general audience (even non pool players), but it usually appeals to
            everyone from a geeky engineer/physicist type to a pool hall junky.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” (2004, Sterling
Publishing).
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/90_degree_and_30_degree_rule_follow_up_part_ii_speed_effects.pdf
title: 90° and 30° Rule Follow-up - Part II: speed effects
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                         ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“90° and 30° Rule Follow-up – Part II: speed effects”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV 3.4) help you locate the resources on the website.
You might also want to view the resources from a CD-ROM. See the website for more details.

     In last month’s article, I answered a few basic questions that have come up concerning my
series of articles on the 90° and 30° rules (see my January through June, 2004 articles at
billiards.colostate.edu). In the next few articles, I’ll look at the important effects of English,
speed, and other factors on the 90° and 30° rules. If you don’t remember what the 90° and 30°
rules are and when they apply, see NV 3.4-3.5 and NV 3.7-3.10. Readers with engineering or
physics backgrounds might also find TP 3.1 and 3.3 interesting. Remember, the 90° rule states
that for a stun shot, where the cue ball is sliding at object ball impact, the cue ball and object ball
paths separate at 90° (i.e., the separating paths are perpendicular). The 30° rule states that
when the cue ball is rolling at object ball impact, and when the cut angle is between a 1/4-ball and
3/4-ball hit fraction, the cue ball’s path will be deflected by approximately 30°. If these previous
two sentences are not clear, you might want to look at the online videos and articles mentioned
above.
                  NV 3.4 – 90° rule with various cut angles
                  NV 3.5 – Using your hand to visualize the 90° rule impact and tangent lines
                  NV 3.7 – Using the 90° rule to check for and prevent a scratch
normal video
                  NV 3.8 – Using your hand to visualize the 30° rule
                  NV 3.9 – 30° rule example
                  NV 3.10 – Using the 30° rule to check for and prevent a scratch

                  TP 3.1 – 90° rule
technical proof   TP 3.3 – 30° rule

      Diagrams 1 and 2 show the effects of speed and vertical-plane spin (draw, follow, or stun) on
the 90° rule. Diagram 1 shows the speed effect for draw shots. The cue ball is assumed to have
the same amount of bottom spin at impact with all four shots. That’s why a lower draw stroke is
required at the slower speeds. The speed is slowest for shot “a” and fastest for shot “d.” Note
how the cue ball travels farther down the tangent line direction with increased speed. Diagram 2
shows the effect of speed on follow shots. The cue ball has normal roll in each shot. Principle
17 summarizes the main conclusions that can be drawn from the diagrams. The harder a shot is
hit, the longer the cue ball stays on the tangent-line path before curving due to follow or draw (see
NV 4.20 and NV 4.21). Only with a stun shot (no follow or draw) does the cue ball travel exactly
along the tangent line, regardless of the speed. For a draw shot, the final angle between the cue
ball and object ball paths is greater than 90°, and for a follow shot the angle is less than 90°.
           fast
           medium
           slow     a                                   fast
                                                        medium

                    fast          b                     slow

                    medium
                    slow                 c           stun
                                  fast
                                             d
                                  medium
                                                       tangent
                                  slow
                                                         line

Diagram 1 Effect of speed on draw shots

                                                               fast
                                                               medium
                                             a                 slow

                            stun                 b                      fast
                                                                        medium
                           fast
                           medium                c                      slow

                           slow
                                                 d               fast
                                  tangent                        medium
                                    line                         slow

Diagram 2 Effect of speed on follow shots
Principle 17 Cue-ball curve delay

Even if a cue ball has draw or follow when striking an object ball, it will still leave initially
along the tangent line path before curving due to the spin.

•     With higher speed, the path of the cue ball takes longer to curve away from the tangent-line
      path (see Diagram 1, Diagram 2, and TP A.4).
•     Be careful when using draw or follow to help avoid an obstacle ball or a scratch if the cue ball
      is close to the obstacle ball or pocket in the tangent-line path (see Diagram 3).

                  NV 4.20 – Delay of follow curve with higher speed
normal video
                  NV 4.21 – Delay of draw curve with higher speed

                  TP A.4 - Cue ball trajectory for any cut angle, speed, and vertical spin
technical proof

     Diagram 3 illustrates an example shot where knowledge of the speed effect described above
is important. A very inexperienced player might think: “hit it hard with follow to avoid the scratch
in the side pocket.” This is terribly flawed thinking. The right thing to do is to hit the cue ball soft
enough (optionally, with slight follow) to result in cue-ball roll. With soft roll, the cue ball starts
curving away from the tangent line as soon as possible (see NV 4.22). If you hit the shot hard,
you will scratch in the side pocket, regardless of what type of English (top, bottom, or side) you
put on the cue ball!

                                                  fast             fast              fast
                                                  medium           medium            medium
                                                  slow             slow              slow

                                                                          scratch
                                      the speed must be
                               slow enough to avoid the scratch

                  Diagram 3 Avoiding a tangent line scratch using slow speed

                  NV 4.22 – Avoiding a tangent line scratch using slow speed roll
normal video

     As with the 90° rule, the exact path of the cue ball predicted by the 30° rule also depends on
the speed of the shot. Diagram 4 illustrates this effect. Again, the harder you hit the shot, the
longer the cue ball persists along the tangent line before curving to the 30° heading (see NV
4.24). Therefore, if you are using the 30° rule to plan the path of the cue ball (e.g., for position
play, carom shots, break-up shots, etc.), you need to offset the 30° direction as the speed of the
shot is increased. If you are using the “V” or peace-sign hand aiming method (see NV 3.8), you
just need to offset your hand down the tangent line direction a little (based on shot speed) to
visualize the final cue ball path. For slow to medium speed shots, the cue ball deflects away from
the tangent line, in the 30° direction, almost immediately (see NV 3.8, NV 3.9, and TP A.4).

                                                              tangent
                                                                line
                                                                        fast    30°

                                                                  medium

                                                                  30°
                                                       slow

                                   Diagram 4 Effect of speed on 30° rule

                      NV 4.24 – 30° rule speed effects
normal video

    In the next few months, we will look at the effects of cut angle, side English, and other factors
that influence the 90° rule. We will also look at some more examples.

Good luck with your game, and practice hard,
Dr. Dave

PS:
               •   If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can
                   access them online at billiards.colostate.edu.
               •   I recently completed a thorough physics analysis to calculate exact cue ball
                   trajectories. If you are a nerdy engineer or physicist, you might enjoy the calculations
                   in TP A.4. I show exact trajectory results for various follow and draw shots at
                   different speeds.
               •   FYI, over the next three years I will be presenting a multimedia seminar across the
                   country, sponsored by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. The title is
                   “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards.” The talks are usually open to the
                   public, so periodically check out the dates and locations on my website. It would be
                   fun to have some BD readers (and not just engineers) in the audience. The seminar
                   is geared toward a general audience (even non pool players), but it is usually well
                   received by both engineers and seasoned pool players.
Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” (2004, Sterling
Publishing).
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/90_degree_and_30_degree_rule_follow_up_part_iii_inelasticity_and_friction_effects.pdf
title: 90 degree And 30 degree Rule Follow Up Part Iii Inelasticity And Friction Effects
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                          ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“90° and 30° Rule Follow-up – Part III: inelasticity and friction”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV 3.4) help you locate the resources on the website.
You might also want to view the resources from a CD-ROM. See the website for more details.

     In my previous two articles, I answered a few basic questions that have come up concerning
my series of articles on the 90° and 30° rules (see my January ’04 through July ’04 articles at
billiards.colostate.edu). In last month’s article, we looked at the effects of follow, draw, and
shot speed on both rules. In this article, we will look at the effects of ball inelasticity and friction.
In next month’s article, I’ll conclude the series by looking at the effects of side English.

     If you don’t remember what the 90° and 30° rules are and when they apply, see NV 3.4-3.5
and NV 3.7-3.10. Readers with engineering or physics backgrounds might also find TP 3.1 and
TP 3.3 interesting. Remember, the 90° rule states that for a stun shot, where the cue ball is
sliding at object ball impact, the cue ball and object ball paths separate at 90° (i.e., the separating
paths are perpendicular). The 30° rule states that when the cue ball is rolling at object ball
impact, and when the cut angle is between a 1/4-ball and 3/4-ball hit fraction, the cue ball’s path
will be deflected by approximately 30°. If these previous two sentences are not clear, you might
want to look at the online videos and articles mentioned above.
                  NV 3.4 – 90° rule with various cut angles
                  NV 3.5 – Using your hand to visualize the 90° rule impact and tangent lines
                  NV 3.7 – Using the 90° rule to check for and prevent a scratch
normal video      NV 3.8 – Using your hand to visualize the 30° rule
                  NV 3.9 – 30° rule example
                  NV 3.10 – Using the 30° rule to check for and prevent a scratch

                  TP 3.1 – 90° rule
technical proof   TP 3.3 – 30° rule

     Ball inelasticity is described by a technical factor called the coefficient of restitution. It
describes how well the cue ball delivers energy to the object ball during impact. In other words, it
quantifies how much energy is lost during impact. If the balls were perfect, and if they were
colliding in a vacuum (i.e., with no surrounding air), there would be no loss in energy and the
coefficient of restitution would be 1.00 or 100%. However, actual pool balls are not perfectly
elastic, and when they collide in air some energy is lost to sound. That’s right ... if you can hear a
sound when the balls collide, that means energy of motion is being lost to acoustic (sound)
energy. Most experimental numbers I have seen for the coefficient of restitution for pool balls
have been in the range 0.90 to 0.96.

     Friction between the cue ball and the object ball creates a sideways force between the balls
during impact. It is caused by relative sliding motion between the balls, due to cut angle or cue
ball spin. Ball friction is what causes throw effects often referred to as English throw, cut-induced
throw (CIT), cut throw, spin-induced throw (SIT), drag, collision-induced throw, cling, skid, kick,
drag, or push (for more information, see “throw” under the “Discussion Threads” area of my
website). Friction is described by a technical factor called the coefficient of friction. This
coefficient quantifies the amount of friction force as a percentage of the amount of normal (impact
line) force between the balls. Most reported values for pool balls are close to 0.06, meaning that
the friction force can be only about 6% as large as the perpendicular impact force between the
balls.

    Diagram 1 illustrates the results of a technical analysis that shows the effects of both
inelasticity and friction on the 90° rule (see TP A.5 if you want to see the physics and math
details). Ball friction causes throw, which shortens the object ball angle, and ball inelasticity
shortens the cue ball angle. Principle 18 summarizes these effects. Both effects reduce the
angle between the final object ball and cue ball paths, so the 90° rule is usually a few degrees off
(e.g., the 87° degree rule), depending on ball conditions. The greater the friction and inelasticity,
the more the 90° angle is reduced. Old, poor quality, and/or dirty balls will show the most
variance from 90°. But remember, if there is draw or follow on the cue ball at object ball impact,
the angle can be significantly more or less than 90° (see my March ‘05 article).

                                    stun                         ball friction "throws" the object ball
                                    shot                        (i.e., shortens the object ball angle)

                                                  90º
                                                             <90º

                                                              ball inelasticity shortens
                                                                 the cue ball angle
                                           tangent
                                             line

                  Diagram 1 The effects of ball inelasticity and friction on the 90° rule

Principle 18 90° rule inelasticity and friction effects

Ball inelasticity and friction reduce the angle predicted by the 90° rule (see Diagram 1).

•     Ball friction shortens the object ball angle, and ball inelasticity shortens the cue ball angle.
      Both effects make the total angle between the cue ball and object ball paths smaller.

                    TP A.5 –The effects of ball inelasticity and friction on the 90° rule
technical proof

     Diagram 2 shows the effects of ball imperfections on the 30° rule (see TP A.6 if you want to
see the physics and math details of the technical derivation). As with the 90° rule, ball inelasticity
shortens the deflected cue ball angle. However, the effect of ball friction is different. The friction
force between the cue ball and object ball affects the spin of the cue ball, which changes the cue
ball trajectory. Remember that the 30° rule applies when the cue ball is rolling with forward spin.
This spin is reduced by friction, and the friction force also adds side spin (see TP A.6 for details).
The result is that friction lengthens the final cue ball deflected angle. This is actually good news,
because the friction effect tends to offset the inelasticity effect. Principle 19 summarize this
result.
                                 normal roll
                                    shot                            impact line

                                                                       30º

                                                                                      ball inelasticity
                                                                                         shortens
                                                                                        the angle

                                                                      ball friction
                                                                      lengthens
                                                                       the angle

                  Diagram 2 The effects of ball inelasticity and friction on the 30° rule

Principle 19 30° rule inelasticity and friction effects

Ball inelasticity and friction have opposite effects on the 30° rule (see Diagram 2).

•     Ball friction lengthens the cue ball angle and ball inelasticity shortens the cue ball angle.
      With both effects combined, the deflected cue ball angle is still very close to 30°.

                    TP A.5 –The effects of ball inelasticity and friction on the 30° rule
technical proof

     I almost didn’t want to write this article, because the information is probably not useful for
most people. I know at least the physics nerds out there will appreciate it. Probably the only time
the information would be useful in practice is if you come across playing conditions where the
balls are old, of poor quality, and/or very dirty. Then you might notice the difference in the actual
vs. expected cue ball paths based on the 90° and 30° rules. Then, you could correct for the
errors by modifying your predicted ball paths slightly.

    Object ball throw is very important and definitely needs to be accounted for, especially at
slow speeds and with dirty balls. However, knowing exactly where the cue ball will go (within a
few degrees) is usually not so critical (e.g., with position play). Also, as pointed out in TP A.5, the
coefficient of restitution and the coefficient of friction can vary significantly with shot speed, cut
angle, and ball conditions, so it is not very useful to try to quantify things too exactly. And
remember, the 30° rule isn’t perfect anyway (see my February ’04 article). As the cut angle
changes from a 1/4-ball hit to a 3/4-ball hit, the final deflected angle of the cue ball varies over the
range 27° to 34° (see TP 3.3 for exact numbers and more details).

    Bottom line: The 90° and 30° rules are precise enough for most people and practically all
situations. Although, it is useful to know that for dirty balls, the 90° rule angle will be less than 90°
and the 30° rule angle will be a little larger than 30°.
      I hope you are enjoying my series of follow-up articles on the 90° and 30° rules. Next month,
I’ll conclude the series by looking at the effects of side English on both rules.

Good luck with your game, and practice hard,
Dr. Dave

PS:
        •   If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can
            access them online at billiards.colostate.edu.
        •   FYI, I have a new section on my website entitled “Online Discussion Threads.” There
            you can find links to interesting online discussions from the Billiards Digest Cue
            Chalk Board (CCB) relating to “Illustrated Principles” topics. Feel free to participate
            by posting questions or responses.
        •   FYI, over the next three years I will be presenting a multimedia seminar across the
            country, sponsored by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. The title is
            “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards.” The talks are usually open to the
            public, so periodically check out the dates and locations on my website. It would be
            fun to have some BD readers (and not just engineers) in the audience. The seminar
            is geared toward a general audience (even non pool players), but it is usually well
            received by both engineers and seasoned pool players.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” (2004, Sterling
Publishing).
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/90_degree_and_30_degree_rule_follow_up_part_iv_english_effects.pdf
title: 90° and 30° Rule Follow-up - Part IV: English effects
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                         ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“90° and 30° Rule Follow-up – Part IV: English effects”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV 3.4) help you locate the resources on the website.
You might also want to view the resources from a CD-ROM. See the website for more details.

     In my previous three articles, I answered a few questions that have come up concerning my
series of articles on the 90° and 30° rules (see my January ’04 through July ’04 articles at
billiards.colostate.edu). If you are getting tired of reading about these important rules, don’t
despair ... this is the last article in the series. In last month’s article, we looked at the effects of
ball inelasticity and friction. In this article, I conclude the series by looking at the effects of side
English. As with the inelasticity and friction effects, the effects of side English are not very
significant for most shots (more on this later). Honestly, the knowledge presented in these two
most recent articles is probably not that useful in your game. I am presenting these effects
mostly just to satisfy some people’s curiosity and to maybe clear up some misconceptions that
some people might have.

     If you don’t remember what the 90° and 30° rules are and when they apply, see NV 3.4-3.5
and NV 3.7-3.10. Readers with engineering or physics backgrounds might also find TP 3.1 and
TP 3.3 interesting. Remember, the 90° rule states that for a stun shot, where the cue ball is
sliding at object ball impact, the cue ball and object ball paths separate at 90° (i.e., the separating
paths are perpendicular). The 30° rule states that when the cue ball is rolling at object ball
impact, and when the cut angle is between a 1/4-ball and 3/4-ball hit fraction, the cue ball’s path
will be deflected by approximately 30°. If these previous two sentences are not clear, you might
want to look at the online videos and articles mentioned above.
                  NV 3.4 – 90° rule with various cut angles
                  NV 3.5 – Using your hand to visualize the 90° rule impact and tangent lines
                  NV 3.7 – Using the 90° rule to check for and prevent a scratch
normal video      NV 3.8 – Using your hand to visualize the 30° rule
                  NV 3.9 – 30° rule example
                  NV 3.10 – Using the 30° rule to check for and prevent a scratch

                  TP 3.1 – 90° rule
technical proof   TP 3.3 – 30° rule

     Diagram 1 shows the effect of side English on the 90° rule. Throughout this article, I am
assuming that the balls collide perfectly elastically, meaning no energy is lost in the collision. The
effects of ball inelasticity, which accounts for the small amount of energy loss, were covered in
last month’s article. For an elastic collision, side English has absolutely no effect on the cue ball’s
post-impact direction (i.e., the cue ball heads directly in the tangent line direction). The effect of
side English on the object ball’s direction depends on the type of English applied. Inside English
refers to sidespin on the same side as the cut (e.g., using left English with a cut shot to the left, as
shown in Diagram 1). With inside English, or with no English and a cut angle, there is always a
relative sideways motion between the cue ball and object ball during impact (see HSV A.63).
This relative motion creates a friction force that “throws” the object ball off course (e.g., see NV
4.15). As shown in Diagram 1, the effect of no English or inside English is to shorten the object
ball angle a little. The more friction there is between the balls, the more throw there will be (e.g.,
see last month’s article for more information). For more discussion on different types of throw
and various effects related to throw, see the links under “throw” in the “Online Discussion
Threads” area at billiards.colostate.edu.

                           excessive outside English
                        "lengthens" the object ball angle        "gearing" outside English
                                                                creates no object ball throw

                                   stun
                                   shot
                                                                         ball friction,
                                                90º            with no English or inside English,
                                                      >90º      "shortens" the object ball angle
                                                             <90º

                                          tangent
                                            line

                          Diagram 1 The effects of English on the 90° rule

                   NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
normal video

                   HSV A.63 – Cut shot with inside English and slow speed
high-speed video

      Outside English refers to sidespin on the opposite side as the cut angle (e.g., using right
English with a cut shot to the left, as shown in Diagram 1). With just the right amount of outside
English, there will be no relative sideways motion or friction between the cue ball and object ball
during impact. This is called “gearing” outside English because the cue ball rolls on the object
ball as if the two balls were gears meshing together (see HSV A.8 and HSV A.62). I really like
this analogy because I am a “gear-head” mechanical engineer. As shown in Diagram 1, with
“gearing” outside English, the object ball does not get thrown at all; again, because no sideways
friction force is generated during the impact. This is why people often recommend using outside
English for cut shots. The other school of thought is to just adjust your aim, increasing the cut
angle slightly (see NV 4.16). The disadvantage of using English is you need to account for cue
ball deflection (AKA squirt) (see NV 4.13) and curve (AKA swerve) (see NV 4.14). The
disadvantage of adjusting the aim is that it takes practice and intuition to know how much to
adjust, and the amount of throw can vary with ball conditions and shot speed. Increased ball
friction (e.g., with dirty balls) creates more throw, and faster speeds usually exhibit a little less
throw.
                   NV 4.13 – Squirt due to high speed English
                   NV 4.14 – English curve due to an elevated cue
normal video       NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
                   HSV A.8 – Outside English cut shot
high-speed video   HSV A.62 – Cut shot with outside English and slow speed

    The last case shown in Diagram 1 (the blue-colored case) corresponds to when the amount
of outside English is greater than “gearing” outside English. In this case, the cue ball is spinning
fast enough at impact to create relative motion between the cue ball and object ball at impact.
This creates a friction force that throws the object ball in the direction of the spin. In this case, the
object ball angle is lengthened. Principle 20 summarizes the effects various types of side
English have on the 90° rule.

Principle 20 The effects of English on the 90° rule

Inside English reduces the object ball angle below 90°, excessive outside English
increases the object angle above 90°, and no English or “gearing” outside English have
absolutely no effect on the object ball angle (see Diagram 1).

•     The cue ball’s path is unaffected by side English.
•     The technical details can be found in TP A.7.

                   TP A.7 – The effects of English on the 90° rule
technical proof

      Diagram 2 shows the effects of side English on the 30° rule. As we saw last month, ball
friction tends to increase the deflected angle of the cue ball above 30°. With no friction, side
English would have no effect whatsoever. Outside English has a similar effect as a normal roll
shot with no side English (see last month’s article). As shown in Diagram 2 (see the red-colored
shot), the deflected cue ball angle is increased a little with outside English. With inside English
(see the blue-colored shot), the cue ball’s deflected angle is also increased a little, but not as
much as with no English or outside English. Principle 21 summarizes the effects side English
has on the 30° rule and TP A.8 includes typical numerical values for various cases.
                       normal roll shot
                      with no ball friction
                                                             impact line

                                                                 30º

                                                                              with ball friction and
                                                                                 inside English

                                                  with ball friction
                                                 and no English or
                                                  outside English

                         Diagram 2 The effects of English on the 30° rule

Principle 21 The effects of English on the 30° rule

Ball friction increases the deflected cue ball angle above 30°. The angle is increased more
with no English or outside English than with inside English.

•     The deflected cue ball angle is still very close to 30° for a wide range of cut shots (see my
      April, 2004 article).
•     The technical details can be found in TP A.8.

                  TP A.8 – The effects of English on the 30° rule
technical proof

    Bottom line: Side English has only small effects on the 90° and 30° rules. For slow shots,
with small cut angles, the effects of object ball throw can be significant and must be accounted for
(e.g., see NV 4.15 and NV 4.16). Also, as mentioned above, cue ball deflection (squirt) and curve
(swerve) must also be accounted for, especially for large offset English shots over large
distances. However, the 90° and 30° rules can be used to fairly accurately plan and predict the
path of the cue ball for position play, break-up shots, avoidance shots, and carom shots (see my
previous articles).

     I hope you have enjoyed my series of follow-up articles on the 90° and 30° rules. Now that I
written a total of ten articles on these very important rules, I think it’s time to move on. Look
forward to some new stuff starting next month.

Good luck with your game, and practice hard,
Dr. Dave
PS:
        •   If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can
            access them online at billiards.colostate.edu.
        •   FYI, I have a section on my website entitled “Online Discussion Threads.” There you
            can find links to interesting online discussions from the Billiards Digest Cue Chalk
            Board (CCB) relating to “Illustrated Principles” topics. Feel free to participate by
            posting questions or responses.
        •   FYI, over the next three years I will be presenting a multimedia seminar across the
            country, sponsored by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. The title is
            “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards.” The talks are usually open to the
            public, so periodically check out the dates and locations on my website. It would be
            fun to have some BD readers (and not just engineers) in the audience. The seminar
            is geared toward a general audience (even non pool players), but it is usually well
            received by both engineers and seasoned pool players.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” (2004, Sterling
Publishing).
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/90_degree_and_30_degree_rule_follow_up_part_v_the_final_chapter.pdf
title: 90° and 30° Rule Follow-up - Part V: The Final Chapter
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                         ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“90° and 30° Rule Follow-up – Part V: The Final Chapter”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV 3.4) help you locate the resources on the website.
You might also want to view the resources from a CD-ROM. See the website for more details.

    Last month, I lied! I wrote that I was done with my series of articles on the 90° and 30° rules,
and I would move on. Well ... I couldn’t! These rules are so important and so often
misunderstood (or even often unknown, as is often the case with the 30° rule), I felt like I needed
wrap up with one last article on the topic. I wanted to bring together the two rules and show
where they overlap. I promise that this REALLY is the last article (“The Final Chapter”) in the
series.

     If you don’t remember what the 90° and 30° rules are and when they apply, see NV 3.4-3.5
and NV 3.7-3.10. Readers with engineering or physics backgrounds might also find TP 3.1 and
TP 3.3 interesting. Remember, the 90° rule states that for a stun shot, where the cue ball is
sliding at object ball impact, the cue ball and object ball paths separate at 90° (i.e., the separating
paths are perpendicular). The 30° rule states that when the cue ball is rolling when it hits the
object ball, and when the cut angle is between a 1/4-ball and 3/4-ball hit, the cue ball’s path will
be deflected by approximately 30°. If these previous two sentences are not clear, you might want
to look at the online videos and past articles on my website.
                  NV 3.4 – 90° rule with various cut angles
                  NV 3.5 – Using your hand to visualize the 90° rule impact and tangent lines
                  NV 3.7 – Using the 90° rule to check for and prevent a scratch
normal video
                  NV 3.8 – Using your hand to visualize the 30° rule
                  NV 3.9 – 30° rule example
                  NV 3.10 – Using the 30° rule to check for and prevent a scratch

                  TP 3.1 – 90° rule
technical proof   TP 3.3 – 30° rule

     As I showed in my March ‘ 05 article, the path predicted by the 30° rule varies with speed, as
illustrated in Diagram 1. The harder you hit a normal roll shot, the longer the cue ball persists
along the tangent line (i.e., the 90° direction) before curving to the 30° heading (see NV 4.24 and
TP A.4). For slow to medium speed shots, the cue ball deflects away from the tangent line, in the
30° direction, almost immediately (see NV 3.8, NV 3.9, and TP A.4); but for faster shots, there is
a delay before the cue ball curves and then heads in the 30° direction.
                                                         tangent
                                                           line
                                                                   fast   30°

                                                             medium

                                                             30°
                                                  slow

                             Diagram 1 Effect of speed on the 30° rule

                  NV 4.24 – 30° rule speed effects
normal video

                  TP A.4 – Post-impact cue ball trajectory for any cut angle, speed, and spin
technical proof

     In my April ‘04 article, I showed how you can use your hand to help visualize the 30° cue ball
direction (see NV 3.8). As I have demonstrated in previous articles, this technique is very useful
to help accurately plan the path of the cue ball for scratch avoidance, position play, carom shots,
break-up shots, and more. Diagram 2 shows how you need to offset your hand down the tangent
line direction a little, based on shot speed, to visualize the final cue ball path accurately.
Principle 22 summarizes this useful technique. The faster the shot is, the more you shift your
hand along the tangent line. Knowing how much to shift can only come with practice. The
amount also depends on ball and table conditions. Notice how the middle finger in Diagram 2
remains pointed in a direction parallel to the original cue ball direction (i.e., in the aiming line
direction). In both the slow shot and the fast shot, the index finger points in the direction of the
final cue ball motion. I want to thank Allison Fisher for giving me the idea to add the cute little
hand to my 30° rule diagrams. That was a great idea.
                                                            tangent
                                                              line
                            the faster the shot,
                                                                      fast
                       the more you shift your hand
                          along the tangent line
                                                                               30°

                                                                30°
                                                     slow

       Diagram 2 Shifting your hand down the tangent line to account for shot speed

Principle 22 30° rule speed adjustment

When using the 30° rule, to adjust for speed, shift your V-sign hand along the tangent line,
keeping one finger parallel to the cue ball direction. The other finger will then point in the
direction of the final cue ball path (see Diagram 2).

•   Shift the hand more for faster shots.
•   For slow shots, the hand is not shifted at all (i.e., it is centered on the ghost ball target).

     Knowing that the 90° rule applies only for a stun shot and the 30° rule applies only when the
cue ball is rolling at impact, you might be asking yourself: What about shots in between, where
the cue ball is rolling some but not completely. Diagram 3 shows the answer. With the draw
shot, the cue ball actually has bottom spin (i.e., the opposite of roll), so the cue ball draws back
from the tangent line. With the stun shot, the cue ball has no roll and it heads directly down the
tangent line. With the 30% and 70% roll shots, the cue ball does not have complete roll when it
reaches the object ball (e.g., because of too much speed or not enough follow). In these cases,
the cue ball path and final direction fall in between those predicted by the 90° and 30° rules, and
the final cue ball angle will be greater than 30°. With the slow roll shot, the cue ball immediately
deflects to the 30° direction. Note that if a shot is hit soft enough and the cue ball is sufficiently
far from the object ball, the cue ball is guaranteed to be rolling when it hits the object ball. This is
true even if the cue ball is hit below center, because any bottom spin or slide (i.e. stun) is
eventually transformed to 100% forward roll by sliding friction between the cue ball and the table
cloth (see HSV 3.1 for an illustration of the loss of bottom spin for a draw/stop shot).
                                                               fast
                                                  stun         medium

                                      draw
                                                               slow            30% roll
                                                                                    fast
                                          fast           tangent
                                                                                    medium
                                         medium            line                     slow
                                         slow

                                                                                             fast
                                                                                             medium
                                                                                             slow

                                                                                     70% roll

                                                                                  30°
                                                                        fast
                                                                        medium
                                                                        slow
                                                                                    slow roll

                                                                      aiming line

                                                         impact line

                   Diagram 3 The effects of vertical plane spin on the 90° and 30° rules.

                      HSV 3.1 – Stop-shot showing loss of bottom spin over distance
high-speed video

     Here’s a question you might have at this point: How can one predict how much roll the cue
ball will have for different types of shots, and how can one know how much this affects the cue
ball path? Like many things in pool, the only way to be able to answer this question is to build
intuition through lots of practice. So what are you waiting for? Get to the table and start building
more intuition.

     I hope you have enjoyed my series of follow-up articles on the 90° and 30° rules. Now that I
have written a total of twelve articles (a year’s worth!) on these very important rules, I think it’s
time to move on. Look forward to some new stuff starting next month. For more discussion on
the 90° and 30° rules, visit the many links under the appropriate headings in the “Online
Discussion Threads” area of my website (billiards.colostate.edu). Please feel free to participate
in the online discussions.

Good luck with your game, and practice hard,
Dr. Dave

PS:
            •      If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can
                   access them online at billiards.colostate.edu.
            •      FYI, over the next two years I will be presenting a multimedia seminar across the
                   country, sponsored by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. The title is
                   “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards.” The talks are usually open to the
                   public, so periodically check out the dates and locations on my website. It would be
                   fun to have some BD readers (and not just engineers) in the audience. The seminar
                   is geared toward a general audience (even non pool players), but it is usually well
                   received by both engineers and seasoned pool players.
Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” (2004, Sterling
Publishing).
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/90_degree_and_30_degree_rule_review.pdf
title: 90º and 30º Rule Review
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                                  ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“90º and 30º Rule Review”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     Periodically, I will write an article presenting a concise summary of principles from past
articles. I think it is useful to review and reflect occasionally to help keep things in perspective
and to reinforce important information. I’m a teacher in my other life and I know how important
repetition and reinforcement are to learning. This article summarizes my previous six articles
dealing with the 90° and 30° rules. Hopefully, by seeing all of the results in one place, knowing
when and how to apply each rule will become clearer.

    In my January, 2004 article, I introduced the 90° rule. It states that when the cue ball strikes
an object ball with no topspin or bottom spin, the two balls will separate at 90°, regardless of the
cut angle. The cue ball leaves along the tangent line, which is perpendicular to the impact line
(see Diagram 1). Principle 1 and NV 3.4 summarize and illustrate the important points of the
rule. The 90° rule is very useful for helping to prevent scratches (see my January, 2004 article),
plan break-up and avoidance shots (see my February, 2004 article), plan carom shots (see my
March, 2004 article), and plan cue ball motion for position play (see my March, 2004 article).

Principle 1 90° rule

With a stun shot where there is no topspin or bottom spin, after impact the cue ball will
depart along the tangent line, which is perpendicular (at a right angle) to the impact line.
In other words the cue ball and object ball paths, after impact, will be 90° apart (see
Diagram 1, NV 3.4 and TP 3.1).

                                                         impact
                                                           line
                                                                        the deflected
                                                                       object ball and
                                                       90°
                                                                       cue ball paths
                                                                        are 90º apart
                                                          tangent
                                                            line

                       Diagram 1 The 90° rule impact and tangent lines

               NV 3.4 – 90° rule with various entering angles
normal video
                    TP 3.1 – 90° rule
technical proof

     The 90° rule applies exactly only for a stun shot, where the cue ball is sliding without topspin
or bottom spin at impact with the object ball. Diagram 2 illustrates some of the cases where the
90° rule applies. For the shot in the top-left of the diagram, the cue ball is close to the object ball
to begin with, so a center ball hit (or slightly below center) at almost any speed (except very slow)
is acceptable because the cue ball will not have time or distance to develop forward roll (topspin).
For the shot in the top-right of the diagram, the cue ball is a medium distance from the object ball.
In this case, faster speed is used to ensure that the cue ball does not develop forward roll. For
the shot in the bottom-left of the diagram, the cue ball distance is the same as with the top-right
shot; but in this case, draw (bottom spin) is used instead of speed to counteract the effects of
forward roll. The bottom spin wears off by the time the cue ball reaches the object ball resulting
in stun. For the shot in the bottom-right of the diagram, the cue ball is a large distance from the
object ball, and both speed and draw are required to offset the forward roll that would normally
develop over the larger distance.

                        90°        any speed
                               (except very slow)

                                                                                             90°
                                                                              fast
                                                                             medium
                                                                             slow

                                        fast
                                        medium
                                        slow
                  90°                                              fast                      90°
                                                                   medium
                                                                   slow

                         Diagram 2 Types of shots where the 90° rule applies

     With many shots, the cue ball is rolling (with topspin) by the time it strikes the object ball (i.e.,
it won’t be in stun). This is where the 30° rule comes in handy. My April, 2004 article introduced
the 30º rule, when it applies, and how it is used in practice. My May, 2004 article showed some
examples of how the rule can be used to help prevent scratches, plan break-up or avoidance
shots, and execute carom shots. In last month’s article (June, 2004), I showed how the 30º rule
can be used to help you choose between a carom shot and a cut shot for a very interesting
example. The key points of the 30º rule are summarized in Principle 2 and illustrated in
Diagram 3. The rule states that if the cue ball hits approximately half of the object ball (see
Diagram 4), the cue ball will deflect off at very close to 30° from its original path. Note that,
unlike with the 90° rule, the 30° angle is measured between the original cue ball path (the aiming
line) and the deflected cue ball path (see Diagram 3). The deflected object ball direction is not
involved. With the 90° rule, the angle is measured between the deflected cue ball and object ball
paths (see Diagram 1). An exact half-ball hit, where the center of cue ball is aimed at the edge of
the object ball, is illustrated in Diagram 4.
Principle 2 30° rule

When the cue ball hits an object ball with normal roll close to a half-ball hit (see Diagram
4), the cue ball will deflect approximately 30° away from its initial aiming line (see Diagram
3, NV 3.8, NV 3.9, and TP 3.3).

•     The 30° rule applies only when the cue ball is rolling without skidding at object ball impact
      (see Principle 3).
•     There is a fairly large margin of error. In other words, for a fairly large range of ball-hit
      fractions (i.e., cut angles), the cue ball path will still deflect by approximately 30° (see
      Diagram 5).

                                                       the cue ball’s path
                                       fast            is deflected by 30°
                                       medium
                                       slow

                                                                      30° deflected angle

                                                                                aiming
                                                                                  line

                                              Diagram 3 30° rule

                                                                    half-ball
                                                                      hit

                                        Diagram 4 Half-ball hit

                  NV 3.8 – Using your hand to visualize the 30° rule
normal video
                  NV 3.9 – 30° rule example

                  TP 3.3 – 30° rule
technical proof
Principle 3 Normal roll

The cue ball gradually develops normal roll as it slides along the table cloth (see my April,
2004 article and TP 4.1).

•     This is true regardless of what type of vertical spin the ball has (draw, follow, or stun).
•     Normal roll gives a ball the effects of a follow shot.

                              Diagram 5 30° rule wide margin of error

                  TP 4.1 – Time and distance required to develop normal roll
technical proof

    Diagram 6 illustrates some of the cases where the 30° rule applies. Remember, it applies
only when the cue ball has developed complete forward roll by the time it reaches the object ball,
and when the ball-hit fraction is in the approximate range 1/4 to 3/4 (see my April, 2004 article).
For the top-left shot in the diagram, the cue ball is close to the object ball, so follow (topspin) is
required because the cue ball does not have enough distance and time to develop complete
forward roll on its own. For the top-right shot, follow (topspin) is again required because the
faster speed does not give the cue ball enough time to develop complete roll. In the bottom-left
shot, because the cue ball is hit with slow speed, the cue ball will develop forward roll regardless
of the English (except extreme draw). In the bottom-right shot, the large cue-ball distance
provides enough time for roll to develop for most speeds and English (except fast draw shots).
                        30°
                            any speed

                                                                        fast
                                                                        medium
                                                                        slow             30°
                any English
                                 fast
                  (except
         30°                    medium
                 extreme
                   draw)        slow
                                                     slow or medium
                                                     speed with any
                                                     English, or fast                              30°
                                                        with follow

                     Diagram 6 Types of shots where the 30° rule applies

      My June, 2004 article showed how a carom shot can be much easier to execute than a
difficult cut shot. Diagram 7 shows an example where the goal is to carom (deflect) the cue ball
off the 1-ball to pocket the 9-ball (instead of trying to cut the 1-ball into the bottom-right corner
pocket). The required angular deflection of the cue ball path happens to be exactly 30º. Because
of this, there is an extremely large margin of error for the shot (see Diagram 5). You can hit as
little as 1/4 and as much as 3/4 of the 1-ball and still have the deflected cue ball path be very
close to 30º, and make the shot (see NV A.1). For even a novice player, the shot is very easy to
execute. This is a great example of how a little knowledge (in this case, of the 30º rule) can help
you easily win a game.

                                                                                               9

                                                             carom (kiss) shot
                                                             off the 1-ball into
                     fast                                         the 9-ball
                     medium
                     slow                                                          30°
                                                                               1

                                        Diagram 7 Easy carom shot
Principle 4 A carom shot is sometimes better than a combo or tough cut

When available, a carom shot with normal roll is usually a better option than a difficult
combination shot or an extreme cut shot.

•     The margin of error for a rolling carom shot is fairly large (see Diagram 5), provided the
      speed is slow.

                      NV A.1 - Cut shot vs. carom shot example
normal video

      I hope my last six articles have helped you appreciate the importance of the 90º and 30º
rules. These principles are not new – they are presented in various forms in many pool and
billiards books. However, many people still don’t appreciate the value of the principles or know
when and how to apply them properly (especially the 30º rule). My goal in this series of articles
was to heighten awareness of these principles and help make it clear when they apply. I hope
you have been or will be able to incorporate these useful tools into your game.

Have fun and practice hard,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access
               them online at billiards.colostate.edu.
      •        If you like my HSV super-slow-motion billiards video clips online, you might also be
               interested in    my   large   collection of     non-billiards   clips  viewable   at:
               high_speed_video.colostate.edu
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, impact
               line, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
               come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
               glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/9_ball_break_strategy.pdf
title: 9 Ball Break Strategy
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“9-Ball Break Strategy”                                                      ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     Do you know how to pocket the wing ball with a 9-ball side? Do you know what to do if you are required
to break from the “box?” Do you know what to do when the 9 is racked on the spot? And do you know how to
satisfy the 3-point break rule? I recently posted an online video (NV J.60) that answers these and related
questions, and here I summarize useful information from the video.

    As shown in Diagram 1, the standard 9-ball break (with no special rules in effect) is a side break, where
the cue ball (CB) is placed close to the side rail. With a good rack and a square hit, you will pocket the near
wing ball (the 8 in Diagram 1). If you instead broke from the center and hit the 1 squarely, the wing balls
would both go above the corner pockets. With the right speed, it is easy to get a look at the 1 in the upper-left
corner after a side break. If the 3-point rule is in effect, where you need to have at least 3 balls be pocketed
or be driven above the headstring (into the “kitchen”), you will need to use faster speed, in which case it is
good to play for the 1 in the bottom-left corner (as shown in Diagram 1).

                                         Diagram 1 9-ball side break

     A square hit allows you to easily control the CB, ideally leaving it close to the center of the table, where
you have the best chance for a shot after the break. When the CB hits the large effective mass of the rack, it
naturally bounces back, even with no bottom spin. To squat the CB near the center of the table, you need
slight topspin on the CB when it hits the 1.

    With a side break, the back ball (the 2 in Diagram 1) also has a chance to go in the bottom-left corner,
and the far 2nd-row ball (the 4 in Diagram 1) has a chance to bank cross-side. With a cut break, where you hit
the 1 less full, aiming more to the right, you can pocket the 1 in the side, but it can be difficult to guarantee a
shot on the 2 after the break.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      January, 2021
    If you are not playing under the 3-point rule, you can use a soft break and still pocket the wing ball. The
advantage of a soft break is that it is easy to control the CB and get a look at the 1 in the upper-left corner, the
side, or in the upper-right corner. If soft breaking and pattern racking are allowed, 9-ball is boring. If you rack
the 2 next to the 9-ball (where the 5 is in Diagram 1), you can easily leave an easy combo for the win after
making the 1. And even if another ball is next to the 9, an easy early win is still possible. These “cheats” are
demonstrated in NV J.60. Thanks to Corey Deuel, who pioneered some of these creative strategies, we have
rules to prevent such trickery. With the 3-point rule in force, a soft break obviously does not get the job done.

     To pocket the wing ball successfully and consistency, it is important that there are no gaps in the “L”
shape through the 1-4-9-6 “L” shaped ball path in Diagram 1. If there are any gaps in this path, the 6 will not
get out of the way fast enough for the 8 to go forward to the corner. In NV J.60, I artificially create gaps in
different parts of the “L” path to show how the wing ball does not go. I also demonstrate that it goes easily if
there are no gaps.

     Because it is so easy to pocket the wing ball and control the CB and 1 with a side break, some
tournaments require you to break from the “box” as shown in Diagram 2. The “box” is usually 18” wide.
With a square hit from this smaller angle, the wing ball heads above the corner. You can still pocket the wing
ball, but you need to use a “cut break,” where you hit the 1 at a slight angle. The ideal aim is the same ghost-
ball position used with the side break. It is more difficult to satisfy the 3-point rule when using a cut break, so
you obviously need to use enough speed. It can also be more difficult to control the CB with a cut break; but
with the right speed, you can usually leave the 1 close to the bottom-left corner for a shot after the break. You
can also pocket the 1 in the bottom-left corner (with enough speed) or in the side (with the right amount of cut)
and try to get a look at the 2 in the bottom-left corner (as shown in Diagram 2). Again, all these things and
more are demonstrated in NV J.60.

                                     Diagram 2 Breaking from the “box”

     Because it is so easy to make the wing ball with a side break and with a cut break from the box, another
rule becoming more and more common requires the 9 to be racked on the foot spot, as shown in Diagram 3.
Obviously, because the rack is shifted up table, with a square hit the wing ball goes way above the corner.
With enough cut, you can send the wing ball toward the pocket, but other balls tend to get in the way with the
9 on the spot. The best strategy with the 9 on the spot is to pocket the 1 in the side. With a cut break over a
fairly wide range of angles, the 1 goes.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       January, 2021
                                         Diagram 3 9-ball on the spot

    The most difficult of the break rule variations is breaking from the box with the 9 on the spot. Again,
with a cut break, you can send the wing ball low enough, but other balls often get in the way. Although, as
with the side break, you can make the 1 in the side fairly reliably with enough cut, but it is even more difficult
to satisfy the 3-point rule. One downside of using too much cut is the CB usually flies across the bottom of
the table where it can interfere too much with moving balls and can also scratch.

     One strategy with the 9-on-the-spot, breaking-from-the-box, is to use enough cut to pocket the 1 while
also using bottom-right spin to send the CB across the table into the 9. With a good rack, the 9 shouldn’t
move much or at all on the break; and by hitting it with the CB, you get a chance to pocket the 9 in the upper
side or upper-right corner for a “golden break.” If you want to see examples of pros pocketing the 9 on the
break during tournament matches, check out the video on the 9-ball break resource page in the FAQ section
at billiards.colostate.edu. It takes skill to hit the 9 consistently, but it is luck if you can pocket the 9 for the
win. Although, the more consistent and accurate you are with hitting the 9, the more often you will get “lucky.”
Regardless, it is very difficult to make the 9, it can be difficult to guarantee a shot after the break, and
sometimes you will not satisfy the 3-point rule. That is why the 9-on-the-spot, breaking-from-the-box rules are
such a challenge. The best strategy for most people is probably to go for the 1 and not focus on the 9 too
much, especially if the 3-point rule is in effect. You will not get a chance at a “golden break” early win, but you
will not break dry or scratch as often.

    I hope you enjoy the video and gain a better understanding of 9-ball break strategy and how to adjust
based on ball reactions. For much more information about the 9-ball break, see Vol. I of the Video
Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT). VENT-I covers all 9-ball racking and breaking strategy,
effects, and techniques in great detail. This comprehensive resource is strongly recommended. Good luck
with your game from Dr. Dave.

                   NV J.60 – 9-BALL BREAK STRATEGY, Under All Rules
normal video

Billiards Digest                                                                                       January, 2021
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                January, 2021
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/a_theoretical_analysis_of_billiard_ball_dynamics_under_cushion_impacts.pdf
title: A Theoretical Analysis Of Billiard Ball Dynamics Under Cushion Impacts
topics: collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills, robotics_and_computation, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
1863

A theoretical analysis of billiard ball
dynamics under cushion impacts
S Mathavan∗ , M R Jackson, and R M Parkin
Mechatronics Research Group, Wolfson School of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, Loughborough
University, Loughborough, UK

The manuscript was received on 9 September 2009 and was accepted after revision for publication on 30 November 2009.
DOI: 10.1243/09544062JMES1964

         Abstract: The last two decades have seen a growing interest in research related to billiards.
         There have been a number of projects aimed at developing training systems, robots, and com-
         puter simulations for billiards. Determination of billiard ball trajectories is important for all of
         these systems. The ball’s collision with a cushion is often encountered in billiards and it drasti-
         cally changes the ball trajectory, especially when the ball has spin. This work predicts ball bounce
         angles and bounce speeds for the ball’s collision with a cushion, under the assumption of insignifi-
         cant cushion deformation. Differential equations are derived for the ball dynamics during the
         impact and these equations are solved numerically. The numerical solutions together with pre-
         vious experimental work by the authors predict that for the ball–cushion collision, the values of
         the coefficient of restitution and the sliding coefficient of friction are 0.98 and 0.14, respectively.
         A comparison of the numerical and experimental results indicates that the limiting normal velo-
         city under which the rigid cushion assumption is valid is 2.5 m/s. A number of plots that show
         the rebound characteristics for given ball velocity–spin conditions are also provided. The plots
         quantify various phenomena that have hitherto only been described in the billiards literature.

         Keywords: impulse with friction, billiards, snooker, pool, ball trajectories, cushion rebound,
         coefficient of restitution, impact simulations

1   INTRODUCTION                                                 systems for billiard games [6–8]. The research on com-
                                                                 puter billiards, which simulates the real-world billiards
Snooker and pool are two popular cue sports generally            environment, also receives the increasing attention of
known as billiards (here onwards the term ‘billiards’ is         computer scientists seeking to create artificial intel-
used to refer to both snooker and pool). Billiards is            ligence that can formulate appropriate game-playing
a classic example of dynamic concepts such as spin-              strategies [9–11].
ning, rolling, sliding, and the collisions of spheres.              Billiards is about manipulating the balls accurately
Billiards was one of the first games to be analysed from         on the table along different trajectories. This is per-
a technical perspective. The 1835 study by the French            formed so that all object balls are potted, in the
scientist Coriolis, entitled Théorie mathématique des            given order, and the cue ball is left at an advanta-
effets du jeu de billard, is a pioneering work on sports         geous position on the table, after each shot, to play
dynamics [1]. Billiards-related research is steadily on          the next shot successfully. A player often uses cush-
the rise and in recent years a number of robots have             ion (or wall/rail/bumper) impacts to achieve planned
been developed to play pool and snooker [2–5]. There             trajectories. Cushion impacts give a great deal of vari-
are also a number of initiatives for creating training           ation to the game. The ball–cushion impacts change
                                                                 the ball trajectories dramatically when combined with
                                                                 the effects of ball spin and give the player a greater
∗ Corresponding   author:   Department   of   Mechanical   and   flexibility in his game strategy (see Fig. 1).
Manufacturing Engineering, Loughborough University, Holy-           Previously, bounces of the ball off the cushion have
well Mechatronics Research Centre, Holywell Way, Loughborough,   been analysed by incorporating the coefficient of resti-
Leicestershire, LE11 3UZ, UK.                                    tution between the ball and the cushion as the only
email: S.Mathavan@lboro.ac.uk                                    influencing parameter and by considering the ball

JMES1964                                                         Proc. IMechE Vol. 224 Part C: J. Mechanical Engineering Science
1864                                         S Mathavan, M R Jackson, and R M Parkin

                                                                   during the time of the impact as constant, do not
                                                                   seem correct (it is shown later that this keeps chang-
                                                                   ing, throughout impact). Most importantly, Marlow’s
                                                                   analysis is not complete.
                                                                     This article presents a 3D analysis of the cushion–
                                                                   ball impact. For given input conditions (see Fig. 2),
                                                                   the analysis enables the calculation of the rebound
                                                                   conditions. This work will be useful for research on
                                                                   robotic billiards that involves trajectory calculations
                                                                   for the ball motion. Ball trajectory estimation is also
                                                                   necessary for the systems that are used to train ama-
                                                                   teur billiard players, as they need to instruct the player
Fig. 1   Positioning the cue ball by its bounce off the cush-
                                                                   how a given shot (with a given velocity and spin) will
         ion, by imparting different ball spins to it while
                                                                   change the configuration of the balls on the table. In
         still potting the object ball (shown in black)
                                                                   addition, a computer simulation of billiards incorpo-
                                                                   rating the knowledge from this 3D impact analysis
                                                                   would give the user a more realistic experience of the
                                                                   game. Furthermore, this work will also be of interest to
                                                                   the researchers working on the physics of billiards (for
                                                                   an exhaustive list of publications on billiard physics,
                                                                   see Alciatore [13]).

                                                                   2 THEORY

                                                                  The billiards cushion is made of pure gum rubber that
                                                                  has very good rebound properties. The cross-section
                                                                  of a typical billiard cushion is shown in Fig. 3. A slope
                                                                  is usually provided in the cushion such that its contact
                                                                  point on the ball is always above the horizontal great
                                                                  circle of the ball, in order to prevent the ball from leap-
                                                                  ing up in the air after impact. The following analysis
                                                                  assumes that the cushion does not change its geom-
  Fig. 2   Billiard ball prior to collision with a cushion        etry during the impact with the ball. This assumption
                                                                  may not be valid at high ball speeds, as the normal
                                                                  ball velocity at I (see Fig. 3), along the negative Z  -axis,
velocity normal to the cushion as the sole variable.              will try to lift up the tip of the cushion. Also, the ball
According to current theory, and referring to Fig. 2,             and the cushion are assumed to have a point contact,
once the ball bounces off the cushion, it will have               which again may not be true at larger ball speeds, as
a velocity of ee V0 sin α normal to the cushion, and a            the ball will start to ‘sink’ more into the rubber cushion.
velocity V0 cos α along the cushion respectively, where
ee is the coefficient of restitution between the ball and
the cushion. This simple analysis does not consider the
effects of ball spin and the effect of friction during the
impact, since it treats the collision as a purely two-
dimensional (2D) phenomenon (the plane of analysis
is as given in Fig. 2).
   Ball spin, both sidespin ω0S and topspin ω0T , as shown
in Fig. 2, are known to affect both the rebound speed
and the rebound angle β of the ball. The latter two
quantities are vital in order to estimate the trajectory
of the ball after the cushion collision. Even though
Marlow [12] tried to address these issues, the way
the analysis was performed involved parameters like
the impact time between the cushion and the ball for
which the values were unknown. In addition, other                  Fig. 3   Forces acting on the ball at the moment of col-
assumptions made by Marlow, such as taking the                              lision: a side view along the cushion at table
direction of sliding between the ball and the cushion                       level

Proc. IMechE Vol. 224 Part C: J. Mechanical Engineering Science                                                       JMES1964
                                   A theoretical analysis of billiard ball dynamics under cushion impacts                         1865

                                                                        in equation (3c). According to de la Torre Juárez [14],
                                                                        in the limit t → 0, the non-diverging forces, such as
                                                                        the weight mg, will have a negligible contribution and
                                                                        thus will not influence the increase in momentum. It
                                                                        should also be noted that the slope shape of the cush-
                                                                        ion constrains the vertical motion of the ball. Hence, in
                                                                        equation (3c), żG = 0. Equation (3c) is rearranged as

                                                                           PC = PI sin θ − PyI  cos θ                         (3d)

                                                                        Similarly, for the rotational motion of the ball about
                                                                        the X -axis, the following equation can be derived, with
Fig. 4    Forces on the ball during impact (a part of the               angular velocity being denoted by θ̇
          cushion is shown)
                                                                           (PyI  + PyC )R = I θ̇x
   According to Fig. 3, the height of the contact point at
                                                                        Where the moment of inertia of the ball I = 2MR 2 /5,
the rail (i.e. I) is h. In both snooker and pool h = 7R/5,
                                                                        the above equation can be written as
where R is the ball radius. The common normal line Z  ,
at the contact point with the cushion, makes an angle                                         2MR
of θ with the Y -axis, thus, sin θ = 2/5.                                  PyI  + PyC =        θ̇x                            (4a)
                                                                                               5
                                                                        Similarly, about the Y -axis and the Z -axis
2.1      General equations of motion
                                                                                             2MR
Referring to Fig. 4, for the linear motion of the ball                     PxI sin θ − PxC =     θ̇y                           (4b)
along the X -, Y -, and Z -directions, the following can                                       5
be written                                                                                2MR
                                                                            −PxI cos θ =     θ̇z                                (4c)
                                                                                           5
  FxI + FxC = M ẍG                                           (1a)
   −FI cos θ − FyI sin θ + FyC = M ÿG                       (1b)      2.2    Impact dynamics at I and C

   −FI sin θ + FyI cos θ + FC − Mg = M z̈G                   (1c)      At the contact point of the ball and the cushion, I, the
                                                                        ball will generally slip on the cushion (rolling can be
Within the duration of the collision of the ball with                   treated as a special case of slipping, where the slip-
the cushion, at any time instant t = τ , consider an                    ping velocity is zero). The slip will take place on the
infinitesimally small time period τ . Now, let P                      XY  plane (i.e. the tangential plane); also noting that
denote the impulse or change in momentum due to                         the axis Y  is in the YZ plane. Let the slip speed of the
the action of a general force F over τ . Also, the accu-               ball at I be s(t) at an angle (t) with the X -axis. The
mulated total impact up to time T is denoted as P (and                  instantaneous value of the normal impulse PI accord-
assuming that the impact started at t = 0); hence, it                   ing to equation (2b) will always be positive, since
can be written that                                                     FI is always positive. In addition, PI monotonously
          τ +τ                                                        increases with time t within the interval of impact.
  P =           F dt                                (2a)               Therefore, PI is considered as the independent vari-
            τ                                                           able for the analysis of impact instead of the regularly
and                                                                     used variable of time t [15]. See Stronge [15] for an
                       T                                               elaborative explanation of the other principles used
          
  P=            P =        F dt                              (2b)      within subsection 2.2.
                       0                                                   Referring to Fig. 5, the slipping velocities along the
                                                                        X -axis and the Y  -axis are given by, respectively
The impulse–momentum relationship in conjunction
with equation (2a), along the above directions results                     ẋI = s(PI ) cos[(PI )]                               (5a)
in the following equations
                                                                           ẏI = s(PI ) sin[(PI )]                              (5b)
  PxI + PxC = M ẋG                                        (3a)
                                                                        However, ẏI can also be written as
   −PI cos θ − PyI  sin θ + PyC = M ẏG                  (3b)
   −PI sin θ + PyI  cos θ + PC = M żG                   (3c)         ẏI = −ẏI sin θ + żI cos θ                           (6)

It should be noted that the impact component due to                     Using the Amontons–Coulomb law of friction, for
the force of gravity acting on the ball, mg, is absent                  s > 0, also noting that the friction forces/impulses

JMES1964                                                                Proc. IMechE Vol. 224 Part C: J. Mechanical Engineering Science
1866                                           S Mathavan, M R Jackson, and R M Parkin

                                                                     where μs is the coefficient of friction between the
                                                                     ball and the table surface.

                                                                     2.3 Velocity relationships
                                                                    The velocity of any point on the ball surface can be
                                                                    expressed in vector notation as

                                                                       V = V G + ω XR

                                                                     where V is the vector that represents the linear veloc-
                                                                     ity of a point on the ball surface, vector V G stands for
                                                                     the linear centroidal velocity of the ball, ω is the vec-
                                                                     tor denoting the rotational speed of the ball about its
               Fig. 5    Slip velocities at I and C                  centroid, R is the vector defining the spatial location
                                                                     of such a surface point in relation to the ball centre,
                                                                     and X denotes the vector product, also known as the
are opposite to the direction of sliding, the friction
                                                                     cross product.
impulses along X and Y  are
                                                                        Hence
  PxI = −μw cos[(PI )]PI                                (7a)
  PyI  = −μw sin[(PI )]PI                              (7b)        V = V G + ω X R                                (11)

where μw is the coefficient of friction between the ball             From equation (11), resolving components along the
and the cushion.                                                     axes appropriately, slip velocities along any axis can
   From equations (3a) and (7b), the normal reaction                 be expressed in terms of the centroid velocities of
from the table surface to the ball is given by                       the ball.
                                                                       At I
  PC = {sin θ + μw sin[(PI )] cos θ}PI                   (8)

Using the earlier argument, for the impact at C, the                   ẋI = ẋG + θ̇y R sin θ − θ̇z R cos θ        (12a)
instantaneous impulse value PC should be chosen                        ẏI = −ẏG sin θ + żG cos θ + θ̇x R        (12b)
as the independent variable. However, equation (8)
shows that the value of PC directly depends on the                   Similarly at C, along the X -axis
value of PI . Hence, also for the impact at C, PI is con-
sidered as the independent variable. This makes it
possible to have PI as the independent variable for all                ẋC = ẋG − θ̇y R                             (13a)
the impulse forces acting on the ball.
   For the impact at C, the slip takes place within the XY           and along the Y -axis
plane. Let s  be the slip speed and  be the direction of
slip measured from the X -axis. Now, the components                    ẏC = ẏG + θ̇x R                             (13b)
of s  along the X - and Y -directions are
                                                                     Equations (12) and (13) make it possible to estimate
  ẋC = s  (PI ) cos[ (PI )]                            (9a)
                                                                     the slip velocities and the slip angles of the ball, both
  ẏC = s  (PI ) sin[ (PI )]                            (9b)      at the table and at the cushion interface.

Hereafter, the independent variable PI is omitted from
all equations for the sake of simplicity. When s  > 0, at           2.4   A description of ball dynamics
C the impulse forces along the X and Y directions, also
using equation (8), are                                             When substituting the expressions for PxI and PxC
                                                                    from equations (7a) and (10a) in equation (3a), ẋG ,
  PxC = −μs cos  PC                                             which is the increment in the centroid velocity in the
                                                                    X direction ẋG , is expressed in terms of the slip angles
        = −μs cos  (sin θ + μw sin  cos θ )PI
                                                                     and  by
                                                          (10a)
  PyC = −μs sin  PC                                                          1
                                                                       ẋG = −     [μw cos  + μs cos 
                                                                               M
        = −μs sin  (sin θ + μw sin  cos θ )PI
                                                         (10b)                 × (sin θ + μw sin  cos θ)]PI

Proc. IMechE Vol. 224 Part C: J. Mechanical Engineering Science                                                      JMES1964
                                   A theoretical analysis of billiard ball dynamics under cushion impacts                                1867

As PI → 0 this equation will become                                        the initial slip speeds at I and C are
                                                                                                                                   
    dẋG     1                                                                                                                      
         = − [μw cos  + μs cos                                                     [V0 cos α + R(ω0T cos α sin θ − ω0S cos θ )]2 
                                                                              s(0) =                                                
    dPI      M                                                                             + [−V0 sin α sin θ − Rω0 sin α]
                                                                                                                     T       2
                                                                                                                                     
           × (sin θ + μw sin  cos θ )]                        (14a)
                                                                              s  (0) = |V0 − Rω0T |
Similarly, it could be shown that
                                                                            and the slip angles are
    dẏG     1                                                                                                                              
         = − [cos θ − μw sin θ sin                                                           −1        −V0 sin α sin θ − Rω0T sin α
    dPI     M                                                                 (0) = tan
                                                                                                   V0 cos α + R(ω0T cos α sin θ − ω0S cos θ )
           + μs sin  (sin θ + μw sin  cos θ )]              (14b)                      
                                                                                           α             for V0 − Rω0T > 0
    dżG                                                                       (0) =
         =0                                                    (14c)                        180◦ + α      for V0 − Rω0T < 0
    dPI
    dθ̇x     5                                                              where α is the incident angle of the ball.
         =−      [μw sin  + μs sin 
    dPI     2MR                                                                (0) is not defined for the condition V0 − Rω0T = 0,
          × (sin θ + μw sin  cos θ )]                         (14d)        as the ball rolls on the table under this condition.

    dθ̇y     5
         =−      [μw cos  sin θ − μs cos                                 3.2       Friction coefficients and conditions for rolling
    dPI     2MR
          × (sin θ + μw sin  cos θ )]                         (14e)        During the rolling phase slip speed s (or s  for the slid-
    dθ̇z    5                                                               ing on the table-felt) becomes zero. In this instance,
         =     (μw cos  cos θ )                                   (14f )   the relative motion between bodies stops at their
    dPI    2MR
                                                                            contact point along the common tangent and the
                                                                            frictional forces become null (the effects of stick are
The differential equations in equation (14) describe
                                                                            neglected).
the motion of the ball completely. The slip angles
 and  can be replaced by the centroidal veloc-                           1. For the condition s = 0, the ball will be rolling on
ities {ẋG , ẏG , żG , θ̇x , θ̇y , θ̇z }, by using the relationships         the cushion at I. PxI = PyI  = 0, and from equation
derived in section 2.3, resulting in six simultaneous                          (3c), PC = 0. Hence
first-order, second-degree, differential equations in
{ẋG , ẏG , żG , θ̇x , θ̇y , θ̇z }. An analytical solution for these                PxC = PyC = 0                                   (15a)
differential equations is extremely difficult to find.
However, a numerical solution is still possible, and the                    2. For the condition s  = 0, the ball will roll on the table
forms as given in equation (14) can be directly used in                        surface, and
the numerical scheme.
                                                                                      PxC = PyC = 0                                   (15b)
3     NUMERICAL SOLUTION
                                                                            High-speed-camera-based measurements were used,
                                                                            in a previous work by the present authors, to determine
As seen already, the solution to the set of six differ-
                                                                            the sliding coefficient of friction between a snooker
ential equations will involve a numerical method. The
                                                                            ball and the table-felt; the sliding coefficient of fric-
numerical algorithm has to be supplied with the initial
                                                                            tion μs was found to be between 0.178 and 0.245 [16].
conditions for the ball velocity, the conditions under
                                                                            Marlow [12] suggests a value of 0.2 for the game of
which different motion transitions (such as sliding
                                                                            pool. Since the present authors have performed exten-
to rolling) take place, and numerical values for the
                                                                            sive measurements of the various parameters related
parameters involved in the equations, such as μs .
                                                                            to snooker [16], from here onwards the numerical val-
                                                                            ues found in snooker are used for the calculations. μs is
3.1     Initial conditions                                                  assumed to be 0.212, as an average value. For a snooker
                                                                            ball, M = 0.1406 kg and R = 26.25 mm.
Referring to Fig. 2, the initial conditions for the
centroid velocities of the ball are
                                                                            3.3       Coefficient of restitution and impact
    (ẋG )1 = V0 cos α,     (ẏG )1 = V0 sin α,     (żG )1 = 0,                      mechanics

    (θ̇x )1 = −ω0T sin α,    (θ̇y )1 = ω0T cos α,    and                    According to Stronge [15], the energetic coefficient of
                                                                            restitution ee is independent of friction and the process
    (θ̇z )1 = ω0S                                                           of slip. ee2 is the negative of the ratio of the work done

JMES1964                                                                    Proc. IMechE Vol. 224 Part C: J. Mechanical Engineering Science
1868                                                          S Mathavan, M R Jackson, and R M Parkin

by the impulse force during the restitution phase to                                3.4   Numerical algorithm
that during the compression phase. The work done at
I by the forces acting along the axis Z  is                                        Equations (14) have equivalent algebraic forms as

                                                                                                              1
               τ +τ                   PI +PI                                      (ẋG )n+1 − (ẋG )n = −   {μw cos()n + μs cos( )n
                                                                                                             M
  WZI =               FI żI dt =               żI dPI
                τ                       PI                                                                 × [sin θ + μw sin()n cos θ]}PI
                                                                                                                                         (17a)
Its numerical form is
                                                                                    where, using equation sets (12) and (13)
                                        [(żI )n+1 + (żI )n ]                                    −(ẏG )n sin θ + (żG )n cos θ + (θ̇x )n R
  (WZI )n+1 − (WZI )n = PI                                            (16a)        tan()n =
                                                   2                                                (ẋG )n + (θ̇y )n R sin θ − (θ̇z )n R cos θ

where żI is the relative velocity between the ball and                            and
the cushion in the direction of the common normal at I
                                                                                                    (ẏG )n + (θ̇x )n R
(here it is assumed that the cushion does not move suf-                               tan( )n =
ficiently to affect a change in the relative velocity (i.e.                                         (ẋG )n − (θ̇y )n R
the cushion is treated as a rigid body)). FI is the normal
force from the cushion acting on the ball. When PIf and                             A numerical scheme is written in MATLAB® program-
PIc denote the accumulated impulse at the termina-                                  ming language. The values of V0 , ω0T , ω0S , and α are
tion of impulse and at the termination of compression,                              the inputs to the scheme. The scheme calculates the
respectively, it can be shown that [15]                                             changes in the values of V0 , ω0T , ω0S , and α by increment-
                                                                                    ing PI in small step sizes. The smaller the value of the
                                                                                    increment in impulse PI (i.e. PI ) in equation (15a), the
            P f
          − PIc żI dPI                                                            more accurate the results. The aim is to find the cen-
  ee2 =    PIc 
               I
                                                                                    troid velocities of the balls at the final accumulated
            0
                żI dPI                                                             impulse value PIf .
                                                                                         The numerical scheme, as shown in Fig. 6, starts by
Rearranging the equation                                                            calculating the initial centroidal velocities and the cor-
                                                                                    responding slip speeds and slip angles as illustrated
                                                                                    in section 3.1. In addition, arrays to store the inter-
  WZI (PIf ) = (1 − ee2 )WZI (PIc )                                   (16b)
                                                                                    mediate values of the centroidal velocities and slip
                                                                                    speeds and slip angles for each increment in the form
The termination of compression occurs when the nor-                                 of PI are also initiated. Then the algorithm continues
mal component of the relative velocity becomes zero,                                its operation by calculating increments in the cen-
that is                                                                             troid velocities of the ball by using equation (17a) and
                                                                                    five other simultaneous equations. Using these incre-
                                                                                    ments and equations (12a), (12b), (13a), and (13b) the
  żI (PIc ) = 0                                                        (16c)
                                                                                    new slip velocities are calculated. The code is designed
                                                                                    to incorporate the modifications necessary when a
According to Marlow [12], the coefficient of restitu-                               rolling condition is reached at either of the sliding
tion between the cushion and the ball, ee , is 0.55 for                             contacts, as given in equations (15a) and (15b). The
pool. However, the authors of this work have obtained                               values of ball velocities are saved as arrays, including
an experimental plot for the ball–cushion impact in                                 the work done at I along the Z  -axis (i.e. WZI , calculated
snooker, where a snooker ball, under the conditions of                              from equation (16a)). The latest parameter values are
rolling (ω0T = V0 /R) and no sidespin (ω0S = 0), was shot                           appended to these arrays once each PI is applied.
to collide with the cushion perpendicularly (α = 0),                                     Again, PIf cannot be found analytically and has to
and tracked using a machine vision camera [15]. The                                 be obtained numerically using equations (16a) and
incident versus rebound speed plot obtained was used                                (16b). The numerical scheme is initially stopped when
to conclude that the equivalent coefficient of restitu-                             żI = 0 (i.e. when the compression phase has ended),
tion for a rolling ball perpendicularly colliding with                              and the corresponding value of work done is obtained
the cushion has a value of 0.818, on average; the                                   from the array containing WZI , which will be WZI (PIc ).
experimental procedure is briefly outlined in section                               Now, using equation (16b), the value WZI (PIf ) can be
3.5. Here it must be noted that the value of 0.818                                  calculated, given that ee is known. The numerical pro-
incorporates the effects of friction and the three-                                 cess of incrementing PI can resume again, and when
dimensionality of the impulse configuration, and only                               WZI = WZI (PIf ), the process is terminated. The rebound
stands as a representative value for the coefficient of                             velocity values of the ball centroid are the last entries
restitution.                                                                        in the arrays of the respective velocity components.

Proc. IMechE Vol. 224 Part C: J. Mechanical Engineering Science                                                                              JMES1964
                            A theoretical analysis of billiard ball dynamics under cushion impacts                         1869

                                    Fig. 6   Flowchart of the numerical algorithm

   Note: in order to start the numerical scheme, a               3.5    Estimating ee and μw
reasonable value for PI has to be assumed. An
approximate value for PIf can be assumed to be                   The experimental plot in Fig. 7 was obtained under
(1 + ee )MV0 sin α, which is the value of the final accu-        the conditions of ω0S = 0, α = 90◦ , and ω0T = V0 /R, on
mulated normal impulse for a horizontally moving,                a Riley® Renaissance-type snooker table, which is also
non-spinning ball colliding into a solid vertical wall.          the official table brand of the World Snooker Associa-
Hence, approximately for N iterations, PI = [(1 +               tion and is used in all its professional tournaments.
ee )MV0 sin α/N ]. Obviously the values of PIc and PIf           The ball speed is calculated from an experimental
will decide the actual number of iterations that have            procedure involving a stationary high-speed camera
taken place in the scheme. An initial N of 5000 worked           (the general experimental procedure is explained in
satisfactorily for the scheme.                                   Mathavan et al. [16]). It is known that 0 < ee ⩽ 1. For

JMES1964                                                         Proc. IMechE Vol. 224 Part C: J. Mechanical Engineering Science
1870                                         S Mathavan, M R Jackson, and R M Parkin

               Fig. 7   Rebound speed versus incident velocity, obtained experimentally and numerically

each of the experimentally obtained incident speed                 speed deviate from the experimentally obtained values
values (i.e. V0 ) in the speed range V0 < 1.5 m/s, the             for speeds V0 > 2.5 m/s. V0 > 2.5 m/s is, quite possibly,
numerical algorithm was run for values of ee and                   the velocity limit under which the rigid body assump-
μw between 0 and 1 in increments of 0.01, and the                  tion for the cushion would be valid. V0 = 2.5 m/s is
rebound speed ẏG (PIf ) was obtained. Higher incident             a considerably high ball speed as far as snooker is
speeds were not considered, as the assumption of a                 concerned. For oblique shots, only the ones for which
rigid cushion may not then be applicable. The values               the normal component of the incident velocity of less
of ee and μw that minimize the root mean square (RMS)              than 2.5 m/s would be analysed using the numerical
value of the error between the experimental and the                algorithm described in section 3.4.
numerically predicted rebound speeds should be the
actual value for the coefficient of restitution between
the cushion and the ball. Calculations showed that                 4   RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
the RMS error was a minimum when ee = 0.98 and
μw = 0.14.                                                        The results obtained from the numerical algorithm for
   Numerically obtained rebound speed values for                  various speed–spin combinations are given in Figs 8
ee = 0.98 and μw = 0.14 are plotted in Fig. 7 together            to 10.
with the experimentally obtained values. As seen in                 In billiards, once the ball is struck by the cue stick,
Fig. 7(b), numerically obtained values of the incident            the ball generally slides, where ω0T  = V0 /R. However,

          Fig. 8   Rebound speed and rebound angle versus incident angle for different rolling velocities with
                   no sidespin (ω0T = V0 /R, ω0S = 0)

Proc. IMechE Vol. 224 Part C: J. Mechanical Engineering Science                                                    JMES1964
                                A theoretical analysis of billiard ball dynamics under cushion impacts                         1871

           Fig. 9    Rebound speed and rebound angle versus incident angle for different topspins of the ball,
                     ω0T = kV0 /R and V0 = 1 m/s with no sidespin (ω0S = 0)

           Fig. 10    Rebound speed and rebound angle versus incident angle for different sidespins of the ball,
                      ω0S = kV0 /R and V0 = 1 m/s with the ball rolling (ω0T = V0 /R)

the rolling condition of ω0T = V0 /R is quickly achieved             incident angle for a rolling ball with no sidespin prior
by the action of friction between the ball and the table             to the impact.
(an interested reader can refer to the camera-based                    Figure 9 depicts the rebound conditions for a ball
tracking plots given in reference [16]). Hence, in most              incident speed of 1 m/s with different types of spin
instances, the ball is likely to be in rolling mode when             colliding with the cushion at different incident angles.
it collides with a cushion, also possibly with some                  According to Fig. 9, when the ball is overspinning
sidespin. The plots for the simplest case of rolling with            before the collision, its rebound tends to be generally
no sidespin are shown in Fig. 8. The plot of rebound                 higher. When the topspin of the ball is ω0T = 2V0 /R, at
speed versus incident angle for different incident ball              a 90◦ incident angle, the rebound speed reaches the
speeds clearly shows the monotonous variation of                     incident speed value of V0 . For any given speed–spin
the rebound speed with the incident speed. The sec-                  conditions, the speed loss is largest for the ball inci-
ond plot in Fig. 8 shows that the rebound angle plots                dent angles around 40◦ . The rebound angles are not
are identical for different ball speeds. The plot sug-               greatly affected by the excessive topspin of the ball as
gests that the rebound angle is influenced only by the               seen in the second plot of Fig. 9.

JMES1964                                                             Proc. IMechE Vol. 224 Part C: J. Mechanical Engineering Science
1872                                         S Mathavan, M R Jackson, and R M Parkin

   Figure 10 shows the rebound characteristics for a               5   CONCLUSIONS
rolling ball with different sidespin values. The plots
provide some very interesting results. Also, when the              A 3D impact analysis for the collision of a spinning
ball has right spin (according to billiards terminology,           billiard ball with a cushion is presented. Differen-
the direction of ω0S – as marked in Fig. 2 – is called right       tial equations are derived for ball dynamics during
spin, the opposite of which is left spin), the rebound             the time of impact and then the solutions are found
speed exceeds the value of the incident speed. In addi-            numerically.
tion, for higher values of left spin, at higher incident              Combining some of the authors’ previous experi-
angles towards 90◦ , the rebound velocity exceeds the              mental results with the numerical solutions, the coef-
value of the incident ball speed. The second plot in               ficient of restitution for the ball–cushion collision is
Fig. 10 suggest that when the ball has left spin (k < 0),          determined as 0.98. In addition, the value for the
and for incident angle values close to 90◦ , the ball              sliding coefficient of friction is found to be 0.14.
bounces back to the side from which it approached the                 The rebound angles and speeds are given as plots
cushion (see Fig. 11). This effect of the ball rebounding          against the incident angles and speeds for differ-
to the same side has been described by Walker [17]                 ent velocities and spin conditions. Under excessive
for billiards, and by Cross [18] in a general context              sidespin conditions, the rebound speeds are found to
for the bounce of a ball. Cross [18] also provides the             exceed the incident speeds and the ball is also found
experimental results for the rebound characteristics               to bounce back on the side from which it approached
of a tennis ball bouncing on a rough surface.                      the cushion.
   A plot of sliding speeds against the instantaneous                 Although this analysis provides the quantification
impulse value is shown in Fig. 12. The change in slip              for many phenomena involved with cushion collisions
directions as indicated by the plot suggests that the              that are described in the billiards literature, it is
assumption of unidirectional slip cannot be true.                  expected to be validated by tracking the spin of a bil-
                                                                   liard ball. A colour pattern drawn on a white cue ball
                                                                   may be used for this purpose.

                                                                   © Authors 2010

                                                                   REFERENCES

                                                                    1 Nadler, D. Mathematical theory of spin, friction, and
                                                                      collision in the game of billiards, 2005. An English trans-
                                                                      lation of Coriolis’ 1835 book (Nadler, D., San Francisco,
Fig. 11   Ball bouncing back to the same side under left              California, USA).
          spin conditions for α’s close to 90◦                      2 Long, F., Herland, J., Tessier, M.-C., Naulls, D., Roth, A.,
                                                                      Roth, G., and Greenspan, M.Robotic pool: an experiment
                                                                      in automatic potting. In Proceedings of the IROS’04:
                                                                      IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent and
                                                                      robotics and systems, Sendai, Japan, 2004, vol. 3, pp.
                                                                      2520–2525.
                                                                    3 Ho, K. H. L., Martin, T., and Baldwin, J. Snooker robot
                                                                      player – 20 years on. In Proceedings of the IEEE Sym-
                                                                      posium on Computational intelligence and games (CIG
                                                                      2007), Hawaii, 1–5 April 2007, pp. 1–8.
                                                                    4 Cheng, B.-R., Li, J.-T., and Yang, J.-S. Design of the
                                                                      neural-fuzzy compensator for a billiard robot. In Pro-
                                                                      ceedings of the 2004 IEEE International Conference on
                                                                      Networking, sensing and control, Taipei, Taiwan, 21–23
                                                                      March 2004, pp. 909–913.
                                                                    5 Alian, M. E., Shouraki, S. E., Shalmani, M. T. M.,
                                                                      Karimian, P., and Sabzmeydani, P. Roboshark: a gantry
                                                                      pool player. In Proceedings of the 35th International
                                                                      Symposium on Robotics (ISR), Paris, France, 2004.
                                                                    6 Jebara,T., Eyster, C.,Weaver, J., Starner,T., and Pentland,
                                                                      A. Stochasticks: augmenting the billiards experience with
Fig. 12   Slip–impulse curves for V0 = 2 m/s, α = 45◦ ,
                                                                      probabilistic vision and wearable computer. In Proceed-
          ω0S = 2V0 /R, and ω0T = 1.5V0 /R (s and  are for           ings of the IEEE International Symposium on Wearable
          the slip at the cushion, and s  and  are for the         computers, Cambridge, MA, USA, October 1997, pp.
          slip at the table)                                          138–145.

Proc. IMechE Vol. 224 Part C: J. Mechanical Engineering Science                                                         JMES1964
                                A theoretical analysis of billiard ball dynamics under cushion impacts                         1873

 7 Larsen, L. B., Jensen, M. D., and Vodzi,W. K. Multi modal         APPENDIX
   user interaction in an automatic pool trainer. In Pro-
   ceedings of the Fourth IEEE International Conference on           Notation
   Multimodal interfaces (ICMI’02), Pittsburgh, USA, 14–16
   October 2002, pp. 361–366.                                        ee        coefficient of restitution between the ball
 8 Uchiyama, H. and Saito, H. AR display of visual aids                        and the cushion
   for supporting pool games by online markerless track-             F         force
   ing. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference          I         moment of inertia of the ball
   on Artificial reality and telexistence (ICAT 2007), Esbjerg,      M         mass of the ball
   Denmark, 28–30 November 2007, pp. 172–179.
                                                                     N         number of iterations
 9 Smith, M. PickPocket: a computer billiards shark. Artif.
   Intell., 2007, 171(16–17), 1069–1091.
                                                                     P         accumulated impulse at any time during
10 Dussault, J.-P. and Landry, J.-F. Optimization of a billiard                impact
   player – tactical play. Lect. Notes Comput. Sci., 2007, 4630,     PIc       accumulated impulse at the termination
   256–270.                                                                    of compression
11 Leckie, W. and Greenspan, M. An event-based pool                  PIf       the final accumulated value of
   physics simulator. Lect. Notes Comput. Sci., 2006, 4250,                    impulse
   247–262.                                                          R         radius of the ball
12 Marlow,W. C. The physics of pocket billiards, 1994 (MAST,         s         slip speed
   Florida, USA).                                                    V0        incident speed of the ball
13 Alciatore, D. G. Pool and billiards physics principles by         W         work done due to impulse force
   coriolis and others. Am. J. Phys. (submitted), available
   from http://billiards.colostate.edu/physics/Alciatore_
   AJP_MS22090_revised_pool_physics_article.pdf. (access
                                                                     α         ball incident angle with the cushion
   date 20 January 2009).                                            β         rebound angle
14 de la Torre Juárez, M. The effect of impulsive forces on          P        impulse during a time of t
   a system with friction: the example of the billiard game.         θ         the angle that the common normal of the
   Eur. J. Phys., 1994, 15(4), 184–190.                                        ball–cushion contact point makes with
15 Stronge, W. J. Impact mechanics, 2000 (Cambridge Uni-                       the horizontal
   versity Press, Cambridge, UK).                                    θ̇        angular velocity of the ball
16 Mathavan, S., Jackson, M. R., and Parkin, R. M. Applica-          μs        coefficient of sliding friction between the ball
   tion of high-speed imaging in determining the dynamics                      and the table
   involved in billiards. Am. J. Phys., 2009, 77(9), 788–794.        μw        coefficient of sliding friction between the ball
17 Walker, J. The physics of the follow, the draw and
                                                                               and the cushion
   the masse (in billiards and pool). Sci. Am., 1983, 249,
   124–129.
                                                                              direction of slip
18 Cross, R. Bounce of a spinning ball near normal inci-             ω0S       sidespin of the ball at incidence
   dence. Am. J. Phys., 2005, 73(10), 914–992.                       ω0T       topspin of the ball at incidence

JMES1964                                                             Proc. IMechE Vol. 224 Part C: J. Mechanical Engineering Science
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/additional_parts_required_duct_tape_and_baling_wire.pdf
title: Additional Parts Required Duct Tape And Baling Wire
topics: uncategorized
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
[NO_EXTRACTED_TEXT]
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/aim_align_sight_part_i_introduction_and_ghost_ball_systems.pdf
title: Aim, Align, Sight - Part I: Introduction and Ghost Ball Systems
topics: collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                    ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Aim, Align, Sight - Part I: Introduction and Ghost Ball Systems”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and technical
proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the resources on
the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the
resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

    This is my first article in a series dealing with the important topics of aiming, alignment, and sighting.
Let’s start with some definitions:

     aiming: determining the line of the cue necessary to send the cue ball (CB) to the desired ghost-ball
     (GB) position to cut the object ball (OB) the required amount for the shot.

     alignment: how you position your body and head to best enable you to place and stroke the cue along
     the desired line.

     sighting: eye alignment and line of focus used to best visualize and achieve the desired aiming line.

Over the next few months, we will look at each of these topics in detail. This month, we will focus on the
basics of aiming.

    Diagram 1 illustrates some important terminology. The ghost ball (GB) is the imaginary CB position at
OB impact that sends the OB in the desired “target direction.” The “line of centers” through the GB and OB
define the necessary contact point (CP) for the shot. The required “aiming line” of the shot defines the
alignment for the cue, assuming a center-ball hit (i.e., no English). Shown in the bottom-left of the diagram is
the ball-overlap as seen from the shooter's point of view. This illustrates an important fact concerning aiming:
From the shooter’s perspective, the CP is always in the center of the lens-shaped area defined by the
projection of the CB onto the OB.

    Before continuing, I should mention that the target direction shown in Diagram 1 is the “ideal” path of the
OB, in a frictionless world. In reality, the OB will be thrown off this path slightly by an effect called cut-induced
throw (CIT). For more information on this topic, see NV B.86 and the “throw” FAQ page on my website.
Regardless of how you aim cut shots, you need to compensate for CIT (especially with slow stun shots at cut
angles close to 30˚, where throw is maximum). Also, when using English, your aim must be adjusted for
squirt, swerve, and spin-induced throw (SIT). For more info on these topics, see NV B.70 and the “aim
compensation” FAQ page on my website.

Billiards Digest                                                                              June, 2011
                                                  impact line           ghost-ball
                                              (”line of centers”)        center
                                                                       (aim point)

                                                                                      line of cue
                                                                                     (aiming line)
                       ball overlap from
                     shooter’s perspective
                                                           contact
                                                            point                     target
                                                            (CP)                     direction

                                     Diagram 1 Basic aiming terminology

     Diagram 2 illustrates three common reference shots often cited in discussions about aiming. The dotted
lines on the CB and OB represent quarter divisions of the balls. Ball-hit fraction is one approach used to
describe the amount of cut needed on a particular shot. This number represents the percentage of ball-
overlap. With a ¼-ball hit, the CB overlaps ¼ (25%) of the OB, creating a 48.6˚ cut angle. A ½-ball hit
overlaps ½ (50%), resulting in 30˚. And a ¾-ball hit overlaps ¾ (75%), resulting in a 14.5˚ cut. FYI, cut
angles for all ball-hit fractions can be found in TP A.23. Again, with center ball hits, the actual angles created
at the table will be a little less than reported due to CIT.

     The red lines in Diagram 2 represent alternative ¼-point sighting lines. For example, to create a ½-ball
hit, you can aim the inside edge of the CB at the center of the OB, or you can aim the center of the CB at the
outside edge of the OB. You can also aim CP to CP, aligning the inside ¼ of the CB with the outside ¼ of the
OB. The ½-ball hit is a good reference shot because it is very easy to visualize a line through the CB’s center
and the OB’s edge, especially when sighting directly over the cue. This useful alignment is often referred to
as the CTE (Center To Edge) line. Notice that with ½- and ¾-ball hits, there is a clear aiming line through the
center of the CB and one of the quarter reference points on the OB. However, with a ¼-ball hit, the line
through the center of the CB is outside of the OB, which can be difficult to visualize. This can make the other
reference lines (red lines) attractive alternatives for some people. However, as we will see next month, if you
sight along an off-center line, your perception of the cue’s direction might be misleading. An alternative is to
sight through the center of the CB while attempting to visualize and target the entire GB. Another is to
imagine and target the resting point of the GB on the cloth. When using this approach, it can help to try to
find a visual marker on the cloth at or near the GB resting point (e.g., a chalk mark, discoloration, piece of dirt,
or any other visual marker). Alternatively, you can target a point in line with the GB center on a distant rail, or
perhaps even another ball.

Billiards Digest                                                                                 June, 2011
                                                                              14.5º
                                                         30º
                           48.6º

                                   1/4                      1/2                 3/4

                            a) 1/4-ball hit           b) 1/2-ball hit    c) 3/4-ball hit

                                              Diagram 2 Ball-hit fractions

    If you would like to practice visualizing and executing fractional-ball hits, Diagram 3 illustrates ball layouts
creating each of the three cuts in Diagram 2. The 1-ball is centered on the bottom diamond line, the bottom
edge of the 2-ball is about half a ball above the middle diamond line (the long string), and the bottom edge of
the 3-ball is right on the top diamond line. As indicated, with the CB positioned as shown, the three balls can
be pocketed with ¼-, ½-, and ¾-ball hits. But remember, the actual OB direction will vary slightly with speed,
spin, and conditions because of throw effects.

Billiards Digest                                                                             June, 2011
                                           3/4
                                                                       3

                                           1/2
                                                                       2

                                           1/4
                                                                       1

                                       Diagram 3 Standard ball-hit fraction shots

     Approaches to aiming vary from person to person. Commonly cited examples include:

          •        Visualize the GB and align to send the CB to that position.

          •        Visualize the angle of the shot and the aim line necessary to create that angle.

          •        Visualize the amount of ball overlap necessary for the amount of cut you need.

          •        Visualize the required contact point on the OB and aim the CB to create contact at this point.

Some people might also use a combination of these approaches, maybe even choosing different
visualizations for different types of shots. Obviously, whatever approach you choose, the key to success is
practice. In the “aiming systems” FAQ page on my website, there is a link to an interesting article: “How do
the Pros Aim?” Most of the pros quoted in the article gave answers similar to those listed above.

    A more formal approach to aiming is to use an “aiming system” that prescribes a clear and unambiguous
set of steps to help you arrive at the necessary line of aim. One example is the ghost-ball-based cue-pivot
method, where you place the tip at the center of the GB position with the cue aligned in the OB target
direction, and then pivot the butt of the cue about the tip until the cue is aligned with the center of the CB (see
NV 3.2 and my October ‘08 article). Diagram 4 illustrates two other well known systems. The first (Diagram
4a) is the parallel-lines CP-to-CP system, which works as follows:

          1. Visualize a line through the center of the OB in the target direction. This locates the CP on the
             OB.

          2. Shift this line to the CB, keeping it parallel to the line in step one (see the blue lines). This defines
             the CP on the CB.

          3. Visualize a line through the CB CP and the OB CP (see the red line).

          4. Parallel shift this line to the center of the CB.             The result is the required aiming direction
             (neglecting CIT, of course).

The second system (Diagram 4b) is called “double the distance,” and it works as follows:

Billiards Digest                                                                                 June, 2011
          1. Visualize the distance “d” from the center of the OB to the desired CP on the OB.

          2. Double this distance by adding it to the other side of the CP. This locates the required line of aim
             through the center of the GB.

Also shown in Diagram 4b, for thinner cuts, it can be easier to visualize the smaller distance “x” from the CP
to the outside edge of the OB, which is doubled to locate the inner edge of the GB relative to the CP. More
info and illustrations can be found under “double-the-distance” in the “aiming” FAQ page on my website.
Included is a document from Don Smith that gives more detail on how to use the system. It also shows how
the system can result in errors when sighting from a point too close to the OB.

                                     a.) parallel-lines, CP-to-CP aiming method

                                                       x                               d
                                                       x
                                                                                       d

                                          b.) double-the-distance method

                                       Diagram 4 Basic aiming systems

    Some aiming systems are based on aligning and sighting to/from the different CB and/or OB ¼-ball
reference points illustrated in Diagram 2. Examples include Hal Houle’s 3-angle system, CTE, and SAM. If
you want to learn more about these and other cut-shot aiming systems, see the “aiming” FAQ page on my
website. Any system based on a limited number of lines of aim will obviously not cover a wide range of shots
without adjustment (for more info and illustrations, see “limited lines of aim” on my website’s “aiming” FAQ
page). However, these systems are still of value to some people. If nothing else, these systems can foster a
consistent pre-shot routine, focus attention on body and visual alignment, and promote concentration (for
more info, see “benefits of aiming systems” on the ““aiming” FAQ page).

     For more information and illustrations related to aiming, see my October ’08 and November ’08 articles
and the “aiming systems” FAQ page on my website, where links can be found to a collection of relevant
articles by fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett. Also, Mike Page has an excellent two-part online video dealing
with aiming (see NV B.3).

    Here’s the bottom line: Aiming ain’t easy! If it were, pool would not be as challenging and fun as it is.
Please resist the temptation to buy into the “snake-oil” sales pitches common with aiming system “marketing.”

Billiards Digest                                                                           June, 2011
There ain’t no “silver bullet!” All we can really do is practice, practice, practice, and then practice some more.
We can probably all agree that the best “aiming system” of them all is HAMB (“Hit A Million Balls”). It is
certainly the most promising to produce good and consistent results.

   I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles dealing with aiming, alignment, and sighting. Next
month, we’ll look at aiming issues related to visual alignment.

                      NV 3.2 – Using the cue to help visualize the impact and aiming lines
                      NV B.3 – Mike Page's aiming video (part 1, part 2)
normal video
                      NV B.86 – Cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT), from VEPS IV
                      NV B.70 – Squirt, swerve, and throw, from VEPS II

                      TP A.23 – Ball-hit fraction vs. cut angle
technical proof

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, ball-hit fraction,
               etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word
               or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online glossary on my website.
      •        I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help find errors
               and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts. Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD: “High-speed
Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                  June, 2011
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/aim_align_sight_part_ii_visual_alignment.pdf
title: Aim Align Sight Part Ii Visual Alignment
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Aim, Align, Sight - Part II: Visual Alignment”                                ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and technical proofs (TP),
and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference
numbers used in my articles will help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or
inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details
can be found online at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

    This is my second article in a series dealing with the important topics of aiming, alignment, and sighting.
Last month, we focused on aiming concepts. This month, we’ll focus on visual alignment (i.e., where you
place your eyes to best visualize the line of a shot).

     Where you place your eyes, and whether or not you do so consistently for a given type of shot, is
probably one of the most important elements of successful pool playing. This topic certainly doesn’t get the
attention it deserves in most instructional books and videos. Diagram 1 illustrates quite graphically the
importance of eye placement relative to the cue. In all three photographs, the shot is lined up straight into the
pocket, as is clear in Diagram 1b, where the vision is centered properly. Diagrams 1a and 1c show what
happens when the eyes are not properly aligned with the cue. With your vision shifted to the left (see
Diagram 1a), the tip will appear to be slightly to the right of center-ball, and the cue will appear to point off-line
to the left. With your vision shifted to the right (see Diagram 1c), the tip will appear to be slightly to the left of
center-ball, and the cue will appear to point off-line to the right. Diagram 2 shows how the tip position can be
perceived to be off center. The perception error will be less when the tip is closer to the CB (see Diagram
2a), and will be greater when the cue tip is farther from the CB (see Diagram 2b). Tip placement inaccuracy
can result in unintentional English, which can cause you to miss shots (for more info, see squirt, swerve, and
throw in the FAQ section of my website). An important lesson to be taken from Diagram 2 is to position the
cue tip close to the CB when aiming and sighting. This will minimize tip placement errors when your visual
alignment is off.

                        Diagram 1 Changes in visual perception with head position

Billiards Digest                                                                                             July, 2011
                                              a.) tip close, smaller error

                                                b.) tip far, larger error

                                   Diagram 2 Tip position perception errors

     Diagram 3 illustrates the effects improper visual alignment has on aiming a straight, center-ball shot.
With your vision centered (see Diagram 1b), the tip appears centered (as it is), and the line of the cue is
perceived properly (straight). The result (Diagram 3b) is a perfectly straight shot with no English, assuming
your stroke is accurate. With you vision shifted to the left slightly (see Diagram 1a), because the cue tip will
appear to be slightly to the right of center-ball, and the cue will appear to be pointing off-line to the left slightly,
you will typically compensate in the opposite directions as shown in Diagram 3a. There will be a slight
amount of unintentional left English, and the CB will go to the right of target, sending the OB to the left. With
your vision shifted to the right slightly (see Diagram 1c), because the cue tip will appear to be slightly to the
left of center-ball, and the cue will appear to be pointing off-line to the right slightly, you will typically
compensate as shown in Diagram 3c. There will be a slight amount of unintentional right English and the CB
will go to the left of target, sending the OB to the right.

                                  Diagram 3 Results of head alignment errors

Billiards Digest                                                                                              July, 2011
     Human vision is not a simple matter. Each of our eyes sees a different “picture” of a shot. The photos in
Diagrams 1a and 1c are examples of how these “pictures” might be different. The straight line of the cue is
perceived to be at different angles due to the perspective provided by each eye. This effect is called parallax.
Our brains amazingly fuse these two images into one, creating a single perception of reality (e.g., Diagram
1b). This is called binocular or stereoscopic vision. To see the effects of parallax and stereoscopic vision,
line up a straight-in shot at a table (as in Diagram 1b) and get into your stance, aiming to pocket the ball.
While holding your head and the cue still, close each eye separately. You will see how each eye “picture” is
very different from your perception of the combined “shot picture.” This effect, called parallax, is what enables
us to visualize distances and angles at the table (i.e., parallax provides depth perception). And as we saw
above, it can also cause aiming perception issues.

     The topic of eye dominance often comes up on the online pool forums. Some people think everybody
has a dominant eye and that it is important for the cue to be positioned in a certain place relative to the
dominant eye. Others think eye dominance is of little importance or relevance concerning how people aim. I
personally think too much attention is given to this topic. Even if the brain somehow favors the image from
one eye over the other, it is not clear whether or not this is important in how the brain fuses the stereoscopic
information into a single perception of the shot. If you are interested in learning more about this topic, see the
“eyes and vision” – “dominant eye” FAQ page on my website.

    Regardless of your eye dominance beliefs, it is very important to have your head in the right position to
perceive a shot properly. I call this position your vision center. It is the head and eye alignment, relative to
the cue, that allows you to see a center-ball, straight-in shot as straight, with the tip appearing to be at the
center of the CB. A good drill for finding your vision center is to set up a long straight-in shot like the one in
Diagram 1b. Mark the CB and OB positions with self-adhesive hole reinforcements (AKA, a "little white
donuts") to make it easy to repeat the shot. Then hit a set of ten or more stop shots. If the CB has no
sidespin after hitting the OB, and if the OB enters the center of the pocket consistently, then your vision center
is probably aligned well. If, on the other hand, you miss several of the shots and a pattern is evident (e.g.,
most of the misses were on the same side and with the same direction of unintentional sidespin), then you are
probably not aligned to your vision center. In this case, shifting your head should help. From Diagram 3, if
the CB frequently goes to the right of target, causing the OB to go left of the pocket, your vision is probably
too far left, and you need to move your head to the right slightly. Try another set of stop shots with the new
head position to see if there is improvement. If you are instead consistently missing the CB target to the left,
with the OB missing the pocket to the right, try shifting your head to the left. After you find the alignment that
results in the most accuracy (i.e., no CB spin, and OB in the center of the pocket), you will have found your
vision center. When you are done, take mental notes concerning how your stance and head position feel
and/or where your nose or chin is relative to the cue. Even better, use a camera (still or video) to document
your discovery.

    On a personal note, I recently determined that while setting up for elevated shots (especially jump shots),
my head must have been aligned a little to the left of my vision center. I came to this conclusion because,
during a practice session, I realized that I missed most of the shots in the same direction (CB to the right,
sending the OB to the left of target). Now that I’m more careful with aligning my vision on elevated shots, I’m
also more accurate and consistent. If you haven’t done the “vision center” drill yet, give it a try. And start
paying more attention to your visual alignment. You might be surprised by the results.

     Diagram 4 shows several different possibilities for where your eyes might be located relative to the line of
the shot (the blue line). With a centered visual alignment (Diagram 4a), the eyes are equidistant from the line
of the shot. The face is square to the shot and the cue is directly beneath the chin. Diagram 4b shows an off-
center alignment. The face is still square, but one eye is closer to the shot line than the other. One potential
problem with this is that the parallax effect is asymmetric. Each eye is seeing a different perspective of the
line of the cue, and this can also change with focus distance (per the different angles formed by the dashed
lines). Also, the perceived tip position relative to CB center could be off, per the effect in Diagram 2. Eye
dominance might also affect stereoscopic perception; although, how the brain processes visual information is
not totally understood. Having said all of this, an off-center alignment might be necessary for some people to
achieve stance and neck comfort.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         July, 2011
    Diagram 4c shows an alignment with one eye directly over the line of the shot. This would obviously be
the best approach if vision in the other eye is severely impaired (e.g., blind or patched). This alignment might
also be appropriate if you have extreme ocular dominance and can ignore the parallax from the other eye.
When trying to sight along a straight line, it can sometimes seem like a burden rather than a benefit to have
two eyes instead of one. With one eye, it is obvious where to place it to sight straight down a line. However,
the binocular (stereoscopic) vision that comes with two eyes provides useful depth perception that one eye
cannot provide by itself. For this reason, two eyes are definitely better than one.

     Diagram 4d shows a centered, but non-square visual alignment. Due to stance and comfort issues, this
is more common than one might think; although, the angle might not be as large as that shown in the
diagram. One potential problem with a non-square alignment is that the effective horizontal position of the
back eye relative to the front eye changes (see the red double arrow) with focus distance (see the different
sets of dashed black lines). This could cause parallax perception and aiming errors when shooting shots at
different distances.

    Based on the effects described in this article, it seems like a square, centered alignment (Diagram 4a) is
the preferred approach. This certainly seems to be the most common alignment for many pro pool players
and most snooker players (where exact shot aim and alignment is more critical). Richard Kranicki makes a
strong case for a centered alignment in his book: “Answers To A Pool Player’s Prayers,” which covers visual
alignment issues quite well. However, some people will not be able to comfortably create a centered and
square visual alignment. If your stance and head position are not comfortable, they probably won’t be very
effective and might cause strain, stiffness, or even injury. Some combination of Diagrams 4b and 4c might be
necessary, even if a centered and square alignment is better. Regardless of which alignment you choose, as
long as you are consistent, your brain can learn to compensate for any perception issues. With enough
practice, any visual alignment can be made to work.

             a.) centered           b.) off center            c.) single-eye      d.) centered but not square

                                 Diagram 4 Visual alignment possibilities

Billiards Digest                                                                                        July, 2011
    Many pro pool players and most snooker players have a very low stance, with their chins being very close
to, or even touching, the cue. This can be helpful for several reasons. For one, it makes it easier to be
consistent with your visual alignment. With the chin so close to the cue, it is easier to see (or even feel)
whether or not you are off to one side or the other. Also, you are sighting more along the cue, similar to a
marksman looking down the barrel of a gun. Finally, with a low stance, there is less eye movement between
the CB and the OB while checking the tip position and aiming line. Note that with a low stance, it helps to use
an open bridge or longer bridge length to allow you to see more of the cue (for more info, see my December
’08 article and NV B.96).

                      NV B.96 – Grip and bridge technique and advice
normal video

    I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles dealing with aiming, alignment, and sighting. For
more information and resources related to visual alignment, see “finding the center of the cue ball” and “vision
center” on the “eyes and vision” page in the FAQ section of my website. Next month, we’ll look at different
approaches to sighting different types of shots.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, ball-hit fraction,
               etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word
               or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online glossary on my website.
      •        I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help find errors
               and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts. Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD: “High-speed
Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                               July, 2011
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/aim_align_sight_part_iii_sighting.pdf
title: Aim Align Sight Part Iii Sighting
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Aim, Align, Sight - Part III: Sighting”                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and technical proofs (TP),
and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference
numbers used in my articles will help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or
inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details
can be found online at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

    This is my third article in a series dealing with the important topics of aiming, alignment, and sighting. In
the last two months, we focused on aiming concepts and visual alignment issues. This month, we’ll
investigate sighting, which concerns where you should align your vision and focus to best visualize and
achieve the desired aiming line for different types of shots.

    Last month, I introduced the concept of “vision center” to describe the head and eye alignment, relative to
the cue, that allows you to see a center-ball, straight-in shot as straight, with the tip appearing to be at the
center of the cue ball (CB). The implication was you always want your vision center to be over the cue with a
center-ball hit. This makes sense for a straight-in shot, but it might not be the best approach for all people
and all shots.

    Diagram 1 illustrates various options for sighting a pool shot. In Diagram 1a, the vision center (VC) is
aligned along the cue, through the CB center to the center of the required ghost-ball (GB) position. This is the
most conventional sighting method and seems to make the most sense. It is certainly the only reasonable
option with a straight-in shot. However, with a cut shot, the GB center can be difficult for some people to
visualize, especially with thinner cuts where it is well beyond the edge of the OB. For information and advice
on how to develop ghost-ball visualization skills, see the “aiming– ghost-ball” FAQ page on my website.

   Diagram 1b shows an approach where the sighting line is through the contact point (CP) on both the CB
and OB. In NV B.3, Mike Page makes an argument that this sighting option is a reasonable choice,
especially for thin cuts. By the way, Mike’s video provides an excellent introduction and overview of aiming
and sighting concepts. If you haven’t seen it yet, you might want to take a few minutes to check it out.

                   NV B.3 – Mike Page's aiming video (part 1, part 2)
normal video

    Diagram 1c shows a sighting approach where you align the inside eye (i.e., the eye on the cut side of the
shot) with the inside edge of the CB so you can more clearly visualize the ball-hit fraction (i.e., amount of ball
"overlap") required for the desired angle of cut. This is the approach suggested by Gene Albrecht on his
“Perfect Aim” DVD. He makes the argument that the inside eye is probably more instrumental in visualizing
the amount of ball overlap, so this type of alignment might help some people. For most adults, the eye
separation (pupil-to-pupil) distance is just a little larger than the diameter of the CB; so with this approach the
cue will always be fairly close to being centered between the eyes. However, because of this pupil-to-pupil
distance, there will typically be a slight head shift to the left for cuts to the right, relative to a centered
alignment over the cue, and a slight head shift to the right for cuts to the left.

     Diagram 1d shows a final sighting approach where the VC is aligned with the center of the CB and the
desired CP on the OB. This approach certainly isn’t recommended, but some people might do this
subconsciously if they tend to focus on the OB CP when aiming and sighting. As Mike Page points out in NV
B.3, any sighting line that is not parallel to the desired aiming line of the shot (i.e., the line of the cue) is
problematic and should probably be avoided. Note that in Diagrams 1a-1c, the sighting line is in fact parallel
to the aiming line for all three alignments.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       August, 2011
                     VC

                                        a.) along cue through GB center

                     VC

                                               b.) along CP line

                     left

                    right
                                   c.) inside eye aligned with inside CB edge

                     VC

                                       d.) through CB center and OB CP

                                      Diagram 1 Shot sighting options

    Regardless of how you align and sight, it is of utmost importance to align and sight consistently. That
way your brain is seeing the same picture for the same type of shot every time. This ensures that you learn to
see shots, and how they vary, always from the same perspective. I personally think the best sighting choice
for most people is the centered alignment shown in Diagram 1a. (Note that when using English, the cue isn’t
usually aligned with the aiming line of the shot because of the need to compensate for squirt. In this case, I
think the best sighting line is along the desired aiming line of the shot, which is the desired CB direction, as
opposed to the squirt-compensated line of the cue.)

     Diagram 2 illustrates one potential problem with a non-centered alignment (e.g., along the CP-to-CP
line). As I illustrated in last month’s article, sighting along a line offset from the cue can skew your perception
of both cue direction and center-ball alignment. Diagram 2a shows the correct alignment, while 2b shows
how this can appear to the shooter because of the offset VC. The perspective created with the VC to the right
of the cue causes the line of the cue to be perceived angled to the right slightly, with the tip appearing to be
left of center. As a result, as shown in Diagram 2c, the cue will typically be angled to the left slightly with the
tip to the right of center (see last month’s article for more information). (And to make matters worse, the off-
center tip position creates a small amount of unintentional English that results in slight squirt, swerve, and
throw effects.) Note that with the cue in the position shown in Diagram 2c, it can be perceived by the off-
center sighting to being aligned properly, but it isn’t! As shown on the right side of Diagram 2c, the resulting
CP and cut angle will be off slightly (see the purple graphics).

Billiards Digest                                                                                       August, 2011
                       VC

                                                 a.) CP line sighting

                       VC

                                             b.) perceived cue direction

                                                                                         actual
                       VC                                                                 CP

                                              c.) adjusted cue position
                                                                               desired
                                                                                 CP

                             Diagram 2 Perception errors with off-center alignment

    The perception issues pointed out in Diagram 2 for the CP sighting line (Diagram 1b) also apply to the
other non-centered sightings (e.g., Diagrams 1c and 1d). In fact, with the sighting shown in Diagram 1d, both
the aiming line and the line of the cue will likely be perceived incorrectly because the VC is aligned with
neither. This is not an issue with the centered alignment shown in Diagram 1a. However, the centered
alignment does require accurate visualization of the GB, which can be an issue for some.

   A couple of years ago, I decided to take a poll on the AZB online pool forum to find out what different
people think about sighting. Here is the question that was posed (with background information):

                   For a typical center-ball-hit cut shot, how should you align your "vision center?"

Participants – about 130 pool enthusiasts, players, and instructors – were asked to select one of the answers
below. The percentage results are listed next to each response:

     a.) along the cue through the center of the CB (conventional wisdom). [42%]

     b.) along the contact-point-to-contact-point line (as suggested in Mike Pages' aiming videos). [20%]

     c.) with the inside eye aligned with the CB's inside edge (as suggested in Gene Albrecht’s “Perfect Aim”
         DVD). [11%]

     d.) it doesn't matter as long as you are consistent with your alignment and sighting. [55%]

The poll results indicate that a centered alignment (“a”) is generally preferred over a non-centered alignment
(“b” or “c”). But, apparently, most people (55%) thought the choice doesn’t really matter, as long as you are
consistent. I personally prefer a centered alignment, and I’ve made a fairly strong case for this over the last
two months, but with enough practice and consistency (in both alignment and sighting), it seems reasonable
that the brain can learn to adjust and compensate for any alignment-related perception issues.

    I hope you enjoyed and benefited from my series of articles dealing with aiming, alignment, and sighting.
For more information and resources related to these topics, see the “aiming” and “eyes and vision” FAQ
pages on my website. Next month, we’ll look at cue tip contact point heights recommended for different types
of shots.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        August, 2011
Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, ball-hit fraction,
          etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word
          or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online glossary on my website.
      •   I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help find errors
          and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts. Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD: “High-speed
Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                       August, 2011
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/aim_visualization_techniques.pdf
title: Aim Visualization Techniques
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Aim Visualization Techniques”                                                  ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at drdavepoolinfo.com. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Do you have trouble with accurate and consistent aiming? If so, check out my recent online video (NV
L.114) that covers useful visualization techniques that you might find helpful. I’ll summarize some video
highlights below. First, if you haven’t seen my “How Pros Aim” video yet (see NV L.38), check it out. I call the
system in the video DAM, for Dave’s Aiming Method. DAM really isn’t a “system.” It’s just a summary of all the
important things pros do to help them aim so effectively. Before spending much time with the techniques in the
new video, I strongly encourage you to incorporate the DAM pre-shot-routine elements into your game.
Although, be aware that there is no secret “silver bullet” solution to aiming. It takes time to develop the skill.
But the following visualization techniques might help speed the learning process.

     The simplest way to aim is to visualize the required contact point (CP) on the object ball (OB) and aim the
cue ball (CB) where it needs to go to create that CP (see Image 1). If you visualize a line from the center of
the pocket through the OB, where the line leaves the OB is the required CP. Another way to think about it is,
the CP is the point on the OB farthest from the pocket. When using this approach, be careful not to aim directly
at the CP. If you do this, the CB will hit the OB at a very different point (as shown in the video), causing you to
miss badly. Instead, you need to send the CB to the place that creates the desired CP.

                                           Image 1 Aiming terminology

    The aim visualization tool most useful for most people is the ghost ball (GB). It is the imaginary place the
CB needs to be at OB contact to send the OB to the pocket. The line through the centers of the GB and OB
define the direction the OB will head. If you can visualize the GB, you just need to aim at the center of the GB
to pocket the OB. See online video NV L.114 for demonstrations of how you can use your cue to help with both
CP and ghost-ball aiming.

     In addition to visualizing the CP on the OB, you can also visualize the CP on the CB to help with shot
visualization (see Image 2). You first visualize a line through the center of the OB to the pocket (the blue line
on the right). This locates the required CP on the OB. Then parallel shift this line to the CB (the blue line on
the left). This locates the required CP on the CB. Then visualize a line through both CPs (the red line). If you
parallel shift this line to the center of the CB (the white arrow), the result is the required line of aim to pocket the
ball. This is called “parallel lines” or “contact-point-to-contact-point” visualization. As with all systems in this
article, see the video for demonstrations.

Billiards Digest                                         1                                                     May 2026
                                       Image 2 Contact point aiming

    The video shows various ways you can use your cue to help with aiming. Image 3 shows one of the
approaches called “air cue” aiming. While standing over the shot, just hold up your cue in front of you so you
see it passing through the object ball (OB) and target pocket. This can help you visualize the line and angle to
the pocket, the location of the GB target, and the required line of aim to pocket the ball.

                                          Image 3 “Air cue” aiming

     Another way to visualize shot aim is with the double-distance system (see Image 4). If you visualize the
distance between the center of the OB and the required CP (the lower “d”), the point of aim is that same distance
on the other side of the CP (the upper “d”). For thinner cuts, it can be easier to visualize the smaller distance
from the CP to the outside edge of the OB (the upper “x”, which is doubled to locate the inner edge of the GB
relative to the CP (the lower “x”). Again, see the video for demonstrations of both approaches.

                                      Image 4 Double-distance aiming
Billiards Digest                                     2                                                  May 2026
    Visualizing how much the CB and OB overlap is related to the double-distance approach. The CP must
always be in the center of the ball-overlap lens to have the correct line of aim (see the right side of Image 4).
While aiming in the standing position, you can visualize the required CPs on the OB and CB. This can help you
visualize the required amount of ball overlap. Sometimes the amount of ball overlap is called the “shot picture.”
This is what you see when you are aiming in the standing position. If you drop straight down into your stance,
the “shot picture” will look the same the whole way down.

    In the video description on YouTube, there is a link to a template useful to practice ball-overlap aiming (see
Image 5). It shows the amount of ball overlap, the CP, and the aim point for all cut angles. The analog clock
hours also give you a way to easily visualize different cut angles. To use the template, place the hole over the
required ghost-ball position with the arrow pointing at the CB. Looking along the line to the pocket gives the
required cut angle, CP, ball overlap, and aim point. You can also place the template on the table with the hole
over the GB position with the arrow pointing at the pocket. As demonstrated in the video, this lets you easily
visualize cut angle and aiming info for different CB positions.

                                           Image 5 Aiming template

     The last visualization technique I will cover here is ball-hit fraction (see Image 6). The ¼-ball, ½-ball, and
¾-ball hits are useful references for judging all shots at these angles and in between. With a ½-ball hit (see
Image 6b), the CB overlaps ½ of the OB, and the center of the CB is aimed exactly at the edge of the OB. This
“center to edge” (CTE) alignment makes a ½- ball hit very easy to visualize and aim. The result is a 30° cut
angle. With a ¼-ball hit (see Image 6a), the CB overlaps only ¼ of the OB, creating between a 45° and 50°
cut, a relatively thin hit. The CB is aimed a ¼-ball outside the edge of the OB, with the inside ¼ point of the CB
aimed at the edge of the OB. With a ¾-ball hit (see Image 6c), the CB overlaps ¾ of the OB, creating about a
15° cut, a relatively full hit. The CB is aimed at the outside ¼ point of the OB. Again, all pool shots can be
categorized as close to or between each of these benchmark shots. And this categorizing can help some
people develop their aiming ability more quickly. The video shows three shots you can set up at a table if you
want to practice visualizing and pocketing the standard fractional-ball aims.

Billiards Digest                                      3                                                   May 2026
                                          Image 6 Fractional-ball aiming

    Be sure to check out online videos NV L.38 and NV L.114 if you want to see everything above is action at
the table, and be sure to try out everything to see if any of it might be helpful to your game. And if you want to
learn more or explore other aim visualization methods, see the aiming resource page at drdavepoolinfo.com.
Also check out the “How to Aim Pool Shots” or HAPS instructional video series. HAPS covers many aiming
systems and teaches how to aim all types of pool shots.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV L.38 – HOW TO AIM in Pool and Billiards … The AIMING SYSTEM of the PROS
   normal video
                   NV L.114 – Aim Visualization Techniques … How to Aim Pool Shots

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at drdavepoolinfo.com.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                         4                                                   May 2026
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/air_aiming_techniques.pdf
title: Air Aiming Techniques
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Air Aiming Techniques”                                                   ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    In a recent online video (NV J.129), I demonstrated several interesting ways to quickly visualize a shot’s
aim and expected cue ball (CB) direction. I’ll summarize these techniques in this article. If you have trouble
aiming certain types of shots (or all shots), you might find these techniques helpful.

    Image 1 shows a technique I call “air cue” aiming. While standing over the shot, just hold up your cue so
you see it passing through the object ball (OB) and target pocket. This can help you visualize the line and
angle to the pocket, the location of the ghost ball target, and the required line of aim to pocket the ball.

                                        Image 1 “Air Cue” Aiming

    Image 2 shows how you can use a “air cue” to help visualize a virtual rail along the edge of the OB to the
pocket. This can be helpful since rail cut shots are much easier to aim than back-cuts in the middle of the
table like this.

                                      Image 2 “Air Cue” Virtual Rail

Billiards Digest                                                                                November, 2022
    You can also use your cue to visualize the tangent line of a shot. Image 3 shows the most common way
when you can easily reach the OB. Just position the cue perpendicular to the line to the pocket. Here, I am
pointing the joint of the cue to the pocket, and the tip points to where a stun shot would head, in this case to
the corner pocket. As demonstrated in the video, you can easily avoid the scratch here with a follow or draw
shot.

                           Image 3 Using the Cue to Visualize the Tangent Line

    If you can’t easily reach the OB, or if you want to stay in your standing position over the shot, you can
instead use an “air cue” to visualize the tangent line. As shown in Image 4, just hold your cue up along a line
perpendicular to the line to the pocket and visualize the tangent line projected down onto the table.

                                       Image 4 “Air Cue” Tangent Line

     You can also use the 30˚ rule and an “air” peace sign to visualize the carom direction for a rolling CB. If
you don’t know the 30˚ rule peace-sign trick, check out the CB control resource page at
billiards.colostate.edu. A shown in Image 5, just point the index finger along a line through the CB and
ghost-ball target. And as demonstrate in the video, just parallel-shift the middle finger to the ghost ball to see

Billiards Digest                                                                                    November, 2022
the direction the CB will head off the 11. In this case, the CB caroms into the 3 to pocket the 3-9 combo for
the win.

                                     Image 6 “Air Peace Sign” Carom Direction

    Check out online video NV J.129 and give some of these “air tricks” a try. I hope they help improve your
visualization skills at the table.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.129 – Improve Your Aim with “AIR CUE” Techniques
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    November, 2022
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/air_peace_sign.pdf
title: Air Peace Sign
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Air Peace Sign”                                                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     Do you know how to play accurate position for the next shot? Do you know how to detect if you will
scratch or not? Do you know how to thread the cue ball (CB) through traffic and come into the line of the next
shot? Do you know how to aim and pocket carom, kiss, and break-out shots? And do know how to play lock-
up safeties? In Online Video NV J.128, I demonstrate how to do all these things with the help of the 30˚ rule
peace sign technique. If you haven’t seen this technique before, or if you want to learn more, see the CB
Control Tutorial, 30˚ rule, and peace sign resource pages linked in the YouTube video description. In this
article, I show you a new and improved “Air Peace Sign” technique from the video that can be used to quickly
predict CB direction with any rolling-ball shot.

     Let’s start with a quick review of the 30˚ rule and the peace sign technique. As shown in Image 1, using
a firm peace sign, if you point one finger in the direction of the initial CB motion, the 2nd finger will point in the
expected final CB carom direction. To practice and train you hand to form the correct angle, and to vary the
angle slightly for different cut angle ranges, see the peach sign angle template available on the linked
resource pages.

                                    Image 1 30˚ rule peace sign technique

      As shown in the video, one problem with positioning the peace sign at the object ball (OB) is it can be
difficult to reach, especially if you are moving your head to try to visualize the final CB direction. An easier
and faster alternative is to use an “air peace” sign shown in Image 2. Just hold the peace sign in front of you
along a line from your eyes to the ghost ball, and just imagine the fingers being projected down.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         October, 2022
                                           Image 2 Air peace sign

      Recently, I developed an improvement to the air peace sign technique. Again, start by visualizing your
first finger projected down to the ghost ball (see Image 3). As shown in the video, if you are focusing at the
OB, as you should, you will see two different images of your finger at the ball since each eye sees a different
picture. You want to position your hand so each image of the finger is on either side of the ideal position.
The shot example in Image 3 is a half-ball hit, so the ideal position is with the finger over the edge of the OB.

                                      Image 3 Air peace sign example

Billiards Digest                                                                                     October, 2022
     In past videos and articles, I said to just imagine your second finger direction being parallel-shifted down
to the ghost ball to visualize the direction the CB will head. The new technique, which is easier and more
accurate, is to just parallel shift your hand without moving your head so you are now looking through the
second finger projected down to the OB (see Image 4). This will allow you to more accurately visualize the
CB carom direction after the hit. In this example from a game of 8-ball playing stripes, after pocketing the 11,
the CB will carom into the 3 to also pocket the 9.

                                      Image 4 Air peace sign after parallel shift

   Online Video NV J.128 shows a wide range of game-situation examples where the new and improved air
peace sign technique comes in handy. If you watch the video, you will see that the technique is fast, easy,
and effective. I hope the air peach sign helps your game as much as it has helped mine over the years.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.128 – Accurate CUE BALL CONTROL with a New AIR PEACE SIGN Technique
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     October, 2022
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/all_ball_fouls.pdf
title: All Ball Fouls
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“All Ball Fouls”                                                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at drdavepoolinfo.com. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

      In a recent online video (NV L.91) and column, I demonstrated and discussed the latest changes to the
WPA official rules of pool. Many people commented on the change concerning “Cue Ball (CB) Fouls Only,”
which is common in league system rules, where you are not penalized for touching or moving an object ball
(OB) by mistake. This is no longer an option under the WPA rules. Instead, the rule is “All Ball Fouls,” where
it is a foul to touch or move the CB or any OB by mistake. In a follow-up video (NV L.92), I present arguments
for why all leagues should follow all official rules of pool, including “All Ball Fouls.” I know if you have played in
leagues under “CB Fouls Only” for a long time, it will be hard to accept something that might at first sound very
different, but try to have an open mind as you watch the videos and read this column.

     This is how “CB Fouls Only” works in most leagues: If you touch the CB by mistake, it is always a foul,
even if it was unintentional. However, it is not a foul if you move an OB by mistake. The videos show many
interesting examples of game situations where unintentional OB motion is allowed. However, there are many
cases in most leagues where touching an OB by mistake is a foul, including:
          •        moving the OB back after you touch it, since only the opponent is allowed to do this.
          •        touching more than 1 OB.
          •        a moved OB contacting another OB.
          •        a moved OB contacting the CB.
          •        touching an OB when it is in motion.
          •        touching an OB with the CB when in hand.
          •        a moving ball contacting a touched ball.
          •        a moving ball passing through the space where the moved ball was before it was moved.

    The last one is the trickiest because you and your opponent need to know where the moved ball was, and
you and your opponent need to be able to judge if another moving ball would have hit it during motion if it had
not been moved, and you both need to agree to all of this. And after all that, your opponent has the option to
either leave the moved ball where it ends up or decide to put it back where they think it was before the move.
Obviously, not all players will be as careful with this as others, and many players won’t always have a good
idea exactly where the moved ball was originally anyway.

     For example, see the game-situation example in Image 1. The 11 is moved by mistake with the bridge
hand during the shot, but the 1-ball is pocketed and the CB ends up with good shape on the 8 (see the CB
position in Image 1b). But the opponent has the option to re-position the 11 where they thought it was before
it was moved. In this case, they could place it (intentionally or not) in a worse position that takes away the look
at the 8 (see in Image 1b the read circle marking the original 11-ball position and where the opponent re-
positions the moved 11-ball). If you are the person who moved the ball by mistake during the shot, you might
think this is unfair; but this sort of thing can happen in leagues with “CB Fouls Only” rules.

     The main reason why American amateur league systems claim they prefer “CB Fouls Only” rules, is it is
less demanding, especially to novice or social players. These players might not enjoy the league experience if
they are penalized often by petty rules for making small and honest mistakes like touching an OB with their
hand, cue, shirt, or hair. It is also thought that fewer arguments or disagreements might result. For example,
if you were playing under “All Ball Fouls” instead, your opponent might call a foul because they saw you touch
or move a ball by mistake without you even noticing it. You might disagree, and this could lead to an argument
and bad feelings.

Billiards Digest                                         1                                              November 2025
                                                   a) before the shot

                                                  b) after the shot

                                   Image 1 Moved ball re-positioned by opponent

    Now I am going to make a case for why all leagues should use the official rules of pool, included “All
Ball Fouls.” Here are the main arguments:

          1. Pool Should Be Played Properly
             Just like any other sport or game, pool should be played based on the official rules. Touching
             balls, even if unintentionally, is not allowed under the WPA official rules of pool. With just a little
             care, it is not difficult to avoid touching balls by mistake.

          2. All Leagues Should Use the Same Rules
             If all leagues would simply use the official rules of pool, things would be a lot simpler. As listed on
             the “pool league differences” resource page linked in the YouTube video description, this is not
             the case. Every league system has a different set of rules, and this can be confusing for
             everybody involved. If everybody in every league were playing under the same rules, there would
             be much less confusion, especially with players and referees who might be involved in multiple
             leagues in different organizations.

          3. Most of the World Uses the Official Rules
             Most pool around the world outside the US is played under the official rules, including “All Ball
             Fouls.” They know and accept that you are not allowed to touch balls you should not touch.
             There is no possibility for disagreements because everybody knows it is a foul, just like double
             hitting, hitting the wrong ball first, not getting a rail after contact, etc. Even in the US, as you
             advance to more serious pool, you will be expected to play under the official rules of the game,
             especially if you play in non-league tournaments or against better players.

          4. “CB Fouls Only” Rules are Complex
             As pointed out above, “CB Fouls Only” rules are very complex and difficult to explain, and all the
             possible situations that can arise can lead to much confusion, disagreements, arguments, and
             bad feelings. If the rules were simpler, there will be far fewer misunderstandings. Saying it is a
Billiards Digest                                         2                                              November 2025
                   foul to touch any ball is much simpler than saying the following:

                   If you touch the CB by mistake, it is always a foul, even if it was unintentional. However, it is not
                   a foul to touch an OB by mistake unless you try to move the OB back after you touch it, or touch
                   more than 1 OB, or the moved OB touches another OB, or the moved OB touches the CB, or the
                   OB is in motion when you touch it, or the touch is with the CB in hand, or a moving ball makes
                   contact with the touched ball, or a moving ball passes through the space where the moved ball
                   was before it was moved.

                   Try explaining all these details to a social or novice player and expect them to want to stay in the
                   league and obey all these rules. Good luck with that!

          5. Ball Touches Are Easy to Detect and Avoid
             Detecting if a ball is touched or moved by mistake is very easy by both the shooter and any
             observers. The same cannot be said for other fouls in pool. For example, most league players,
             especially novice and social players, are clueless about how to detect double hits or whether a
             wrong ball was hit first or not. In fact, even experienced professional referees sometimes make
             mistakes calling these types of fouls. Many examples can be found on the “bad calls in pro
             matches” page linked in the YouTube video description. To learn how to easily detect these
             types of fouls, see the videos and info on the “double hit” and “wrong ball hit first” resource pages
             also linked. If you know what to look for, these types of fouls are very easy to detect.

          6. Simple Foul to Add
             There are many possible fouls in pool, so adding one more, which is among the easiest to detect,
             should not be as big of a concern as some people might think. Here’s a partial list of the many
             fouls already enforced in most pool leagues: hitting the CB twice, touching the CB by mistake,
             touching a ball with the CB with ball in hand, hitting the wrong ball first with the CB, not driving a
             ball to a rail after ball contact, not having a foot in contact with the floor during a hit, not driving 4
             balls to rails on a break shot, scratching, pushing the CB, intentionally miscuing, intentionally
             jumping with a scoop shot, lifting of dropping the cue instead of stroking forward, driving a ball off
             the table, marking the cloth with a chalked tip, marking an aim point on the rail with a chalk or
             anything else, interfering with ball motion, not marking the pocket called for the 8, etc! And again,
             many of these are much more difficult to detect, and can involve more disagreements and bad
             feelings, as compared to seeing if a ball is touched or moved by mistake.

     The best way to prevent disagreements, arguments, and bad feelings in pool leagues is to be
knowledgeable of the rules, be friendly, and have good sportsmanship. If you want to improve your knowledge,
see the videos and info on the linked “rules” and “fouls” resource pages. Novice players should especially be
encouraged to take advantage of these free resources so they can learn how the game is played. Check out
online video NV L.92 for lots of examples of both proper and improper behavior concerning application of rules,
including how to avoid potential arguments.

    To make a change to All-Ball Fouls go smoothly, it would help to institute a procedural policy that would
help prevent disagreements, arguments, or bad feelings. Here is a possible framework:

          •        If the opponent did not ask to have somebody observe a shot (or game) and did not ask to video
                   record the shot (or game), and if the shooter did not see or feel the foul and does not agree they
                   fouled, the shooter gets the benefit of the doubt (no foul). There is no reason to argue because
                   this is the rule.

          •        If a dishonest player develops a reputation of not admitting to any fouls, even those blatantly
                   obvious, it is the opponent’s responsibility to ask for an observer more, especially if there is any
                   suspected chance for a foul resulting from a double hit, wrong ball hit first, ball touch, etc.

          •        If a dishonest player attempts to call “phantom fouls” that obviously did not occur, there is again no
                   reason for an argument since the shooter gets the final say (if no observer was asked to watch).
                   The dishonest players should also be reported to their team captain and league operator so an
                   attempt can be made to change their unsportsmanlike behavior.

Billiards Digest                                             3                                             November 2025
     With a clear and circulated procedural policy, there is no reason for arguments or disagreements. People
will quickly adjust to the new rules and policies and how they are applied, so there should be fewer chances for
disagreements and bad feelings.

     So what do you think? Should pool leagues continue to use non-standard rules? And should they continue
to play under “CB Fouls Only” rules? I know this can be a “touchy” subject since there is tradition and inertia
involved with doing something a certain way for a long time. But based on all the arguments above, I hope you
agree that league systems should consider changing. I also hope you also agree that allowing players to touch
balls by mistake is not a good thing. If so, please share and discuss this column and the online videos with
your teammates, league operators, and league owners and administrators to try to get things changed.

      Have fun in league, and good luck with your game from Dr. Dave!

                   NV L.91 – New WPA Official Rules of Pool … Learn About All the Changes
   normal video
                   NV L.92 – Why Pool Leagues Should Embrace “ALL BALL FOULS”

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at drdavepoolinfo.com.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                         4                                              November 2025
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/amateur_physics_for_the_amateur_pool_player.pdf
title: APAPP 4 of 4
topics: collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
Amateur Physics
      for the
Amateur Pool Player
      Third Edition

                      Ron Shepard
Ron Shepard
Argonne Pool League
Argonne National Laboratory
Argonne, IL 60439
email: shepard@tcg.anl.gov

Copyright © Ron Shepard
3rd Edition 1997
2nd Edition 1996
1st Edition 1994

The author grants permission to individuals for personal use to make copies of this
manuscript and to store and distribute this document in electronic form. All rights
regarding the commercial use of this manuscript are reserved by the author.
Introduction
         The word amateur is based on the Latin words amator (a lover) and amare (to
love). An amateur is someone who loves what he does, and pursues it for the pleasure of
the act itself. These notes are intended for the pool player who enjoys playing the game,
and who enjoys understanding how things work using the language of physics. There is
probably very little pool playing technique discussed in this manuscript that will be new
to the experienced pool player, and likewise, there is little physics that will be new to the
experienced physicist. However, there will be hopefully new pool technique for the
interested physicist and new physics for the interested pool player. The tone of the
presentation is not directed necessarily toward either the pool student or the physics
student, but rather toward the amateur who enjoys both. The physics that is used here is
not derived from first principles; it is assumed that the reader is familiar with such ideas
as Newton’s laws of motion, center of mass transformations, moments of inertia, linear
and angular acceleration, geometry, trigonometry, and vector notation. Reference to a
calculus-based introductory college level physics textbook should be sufficient to
understand fully any of the physics used or mentioned in this text. The Feynman
Lectures on Physics (Vol. 1) is one such text that the reader will find enjoyable.
         This discussion is divided into five sections. Section 1 discusses the equipment
(balls, tables, cue sticks, cue tip, cloth) and some of its associated properties (various
friction coefficients, forces, moments of inertia), section 2 discusses the concept of
natural roll, section 3 discusses the cue tip and cue ball impact, section 4 discusses
collisions between balls, and section 5 discusses the use of statistical methods. Each
section includes some general discussion and specific problems (along with their
solutions). Some exercises are also given along the way; it is intended for the reader to
experiment on a pool table with some of the techniques that have been discussed.

                                              1
1. Properties of the Equipment
         Pool, billiard, and snooker balls are uniform spheres of, usually, a phenolic resin
type of plastic. Older balls have been made of clay, ivory, wood, and other materials. On
coin-operated tables, the cue ball is sometimes larger and heavier than the other balls;
otherwise, all the balls in a set are the same size and weight. Standard pool balls are
2 1 4 " in diameter, snooker balls are either of two sizes, 2 1 8 " or 2 116 ", and carom
billiard balls are one of three sizes, 2 27 64 ", 2 3 8 ", or 2 716 ". Tolerances in all cases are
±0.005". Pool balls weigh 5.5 to 6oz, snooker balls weigh 5 to 5.5oz, and billiard balls
weigh 7 to 7.5oz.

Problem 1.1: What is the volume of a pool ball in terms of its radius R?
Answer: In spherical coordinates, the volume of a sphere is given by
             2    R
        V=   ∫ ∫ ∫ r 2 sin drd d = ( 13 R3 )(2)(2 ) = 43 R3
             0 0 0
where R is the radius of the ball. Assuming that the ball is a perfect sphere, the minimum
radius is Rmin=1.1225" and the maximum radius is Rmax=1.1275". The volume of a
standard pool ball is between 43 R3min =5.924in3=97.08cm3 and
4
3   R3max =6.004in3=98.39cm3.

Problem 1.2: In order to satisfy the size and weight limits, what is the density range of
the ball material in units of g/cm3?
Answer: The density is the mass divided by the volume, ®=M⁄V. The minimum mass is
5.5oz(28.35g/oz)=155.9g, and the maximum mass is 6.0oz(28.35g/oz)=170.1g. The
minimum density is ®min=Mmin⁄Vmax=1.559g⁄98.39cm3=1.58g/cm3 and the maximum
density is ®max=Mmax⁄Vmin =170.1g⁄97.08cm3=1.75g/cm3. For comparison, the density of
water at room termperature is 0.997g/cm3 , a saturated sucrose (table sugar) solution is
1.44g/cm3, a saturated cesium chloride solution is 1.89g/cm3, and the density of mercury
is 13.6g/cm3, so a pool ball should easily sink in water, slowly sink in the sugar solution,
barely float in the cesium chloride solution, and easily float in mercury.

        The inertia tensor of a rigid body is defined as the elements of the 3 by 3 matrix
                                       
        Iij = ∫ (r)  ij ∑ rk2 − ri r j  dv
               V      k               
where the components of the vector r=(x,y,z) are the cartesian coordinates. For a uniform
sphere, ®(r)=® is a constant for r<R and is the density of the ball material. The mass of
the ball is M = V = 43 R3 .

                                                2
Problem 1.3: Determine the inertia tensor for a ball in terms of M and R.
Answer: Taking the moment of inertia about the x-axis gives
        Ixx =   ∫V (r)(z 2 + y2 )dv = Szz + Syy = 2Szz
It is interesting to notice that the moment of inertia about the x-axis, for example as given
above, depends only on how the mass of the object is distributed along the z- and y-axes.
Some thoughtful reflection will reveal that, for the coordinate axes origin taken to be the
center of the sphere, the z 2 integral Szz is the same as the y2 integral Syy, so only one
integral really needs to be done as indicated in the last equality above. In fact,
Sxx=Syy=Szz since for a sphere, the choice of axis is completely arbitrary. Using
 z = r cos( ) , x = r sin ( ) cos( ) , and y = r sin( ) sin( ) allows these integrals to be
written in polar coordinates. Taking Szz for example gives
                 R                      2

                 ∫ r dr ∫ cos sin d ∫ d = ( 15 R5 )( 23 )(2 ) = 15 MR2
                     4       2
        Szz =
                 0       0               0
The moment of inertia about any axis is twice this value, giving Ixx = Iyy = Izz = 25 MR2 .
It may also be seen that the off-diagonal elements of the inertia tensor are all zero. This
means that any choice of orthogonal coordinate axes is formally equivalent to any other,
and any such choice corresponds to the principle axes. For other rigid bodies, the off-
diagonal elements are generally nonzero, and only a special choice of the coordinate axes
will result in a diagonal inertia tensor. Written as a matrix, the inertia tensor is
             2MR2  1 0 0
        I=           0 1 0
                5  0 0 1
An important property of this inertia tensor is that its product with any vector ∑ is simply
                                                              (       )
a scaling of that vector, the direction does not change: I∑ = 25 MR 2 ∑ .

        The kinetic energy of a ball consists of two parts, translational and rotational. The
translational kinetic energy is given by T(Trans)=1/2MV2, where V is the velocity of the
center of mass of the ball. The mass of the ball, M, is the proportionality constant
between the velocity squared and the energy. The rotational kinetic energy about a
principle axis is given by the similar equation T (Rot) =1/2I∑2, where ∑ is the angular
velocity, for example in radians per second. Therefore the moment of inertia, I, is the
proportionality constant between the angular velocity squared and the rotational kinetic
energy. The most general equation for the rotational energy of a rigid body is
T(Rot) =1/2∑⋅I⋅∑, in which ∑ is the angular velocity about each axis, I is the 3 by 3 inertia
tensor, and the dot implies the appropriate matrix-vector or vector-vector product. The
quantity L=I∑ is the rotational angular momentum about the center of mass, and the
simple form for I given above means that for a pool ball the angular momentum is always

                                               3
aligned with the angular rotation. The rotational energy may then be written as
         (       )        (       )
T(Rot ) = 15 MR 2 ∑ ⋅∑ = 15 MR 2 ∑ 2 . The freedom of axes choice for a uniform sphere
will often allow the problem at hand to be simplified to only a single rotation axis, in
which case the simple scalar equation may be used
        When a force is applied to a rigid body, such as a ball, the velocity of the center of
mass changes according to the equation F = MV     ˙ , and the angular velocity changes
according to the equation r × F = I ∑˙ . When a single principle rotational axis is
considered, the latter equation reduces to the simpler r sin( ) F = I ∑˙ , where œ is the
angle between the vectors r and F, with magnitudes r and |F| respectively. ∑ is in the
direction perpendicular to the plane defined by the two vectors r and F, and aligned, by
convention, with the right-hand-rule (i.e. when the fingers of the right hand curl in the
direction that rotates r into F, then the thumb points along the direction of positive ∑;
other analytic expressions for the vector cross product will also be used in this discussion,
but the right-hand-rule provides a useful and intuitive defintion.) The vector r points
from the center of mass of the ball to the point on the surface of the ball at which the
force is applied. In these equations, V˙ ≡ dVdt is the linear acceleration along each
coordinate axis and ∑˙ ≡ d∑
                          dt is the angular acceleration around each coordinate axis. The
similarities in the relations between the force and the mass M for the linear acceleration
and between the force and the moment of inertia I for the rotational acceleration are again
seen. The rsin(œ) factor shows how the angular acceleration depends on the direction of
the force. When the force is applied directly toward the center of mass of the ball, then
the sin(œ) factor is zero and there is no angular acceleration; it is only when the force is
applied in a direction askew from the center of the ball that angular acceleration occurs.
        A force is required to rub two objects together. If the two objects are pressed
together with a normal force FN, and a sideways force of magnitude Ff causes the two
objects to slip against each other without acceleration, then the coefficient of sliding
friction is defined as µ(sliding)=Ff/FN. To a good approximation, the coefficient of
friction between two surfaces is a constant, independent of the forces and independent of
the speeds of the two sliding objects. A small coefficient of friction is associated with
slippery object pairs, and a large coefficient of friction is associated with sticky object
pairs. There is also a static coefficient of friction. Static friction is defined in a similar
manner to sliding friction, but it applies to two surfaces that are at rest. For a given pair
of surfaces, the static coefficient of friction is larger than the sliding coefficient, although
for some surface pairs they are very close in value.
        There are several frictional forces that are important in pool. The first is the
sliding friction of a ball on the cloth, Fs. Fs=µ (sliding)W where W is the weight of the ball
(FN=W=Mg where g is the acceleration of gravity). Since the ball weight and the
coefficient of friction are constants for a given ball and for a given table, the frictional
force of a sliding ball is a constant. The magnitude of the frictional force does not depend

                                               4
on the velocity of the ball or upon ∑ for the ball as long as the ball is sliding on the cloth.
The direction of this force does depend on the ball velocity and ∑, and this will be
examined in more detail in the following discussions. If the ball is not sliding on the
cloth (e.g. the ball is at rest, or the ball is rolling smoothly without slipping on the cloth
surface), then there is no sliding frictional force.
        It is interesting to consider the nature of the cause of a sliding frictional force. At
a microscopic level, the atoms in the molecules of one surface are attracted to those of the
other surface. As the object slides forward, new interactions, or bonds, are formed in the
forward direction, maintained momentarily, and then broken as the individual atoms are
pulled apart. However, it is not directly these bonds that cause the friction. The reason is
that the same kinetic energy is lost in forming the bond as is gained back again when it
breaks, and there is no net change of energy due to the forming and breaking of these
bonds as the surfaces slide across each other. But for the small amount of time that the
individual atoms interact, vibrational energy of the surface molecules is transferred to the
other molecules in the bulk of the objects. (Energy is also transferred in the opposite
direction, but at a much smaller rate; the net energy flow is from the surface atoms to the
bulk atoms, a consequence of the second law of thermodynamics.) The result of this
energy transfer is that translational kinetic energy is transformed into vibrations of the
molecules of the bulk materials, or in other words, into heat and sound. From this point
of view of a physicist, it might be said that it is the heat and sound that cause the
frictional force; this is somewhat the opposite of the layman’s point of view, namely, that
friction causes the heat.

Problem 1.4: A block slides down an inclined plane without acceleration; what is the
relation between µ and the angle of the slope of the plane?
Answer: The downward force is the weight of the object W=Mg. The component of this
force normal to the plane surface is F N=Wcos(å) where å is the angle of incline. The
component of the downward force tangent to the surface of the plane is Ft=Wsin(å). This
force is directed down the incline, accelerating the object, and it is opposed by the
frictional force which is directed uphill. Since the object is sliding without acceleration,
all of this tangential force is balanced exactly by the frictional force, Fs=-Ft. The
coefficient of friction is then given by µ=Ft/FN=tan(å). This relation between slope and
the coefficient of friction is so fundamental that it is sometimes taken as a de facto
defintion.

        A sliding block provides a simple conceptual model for understanding several
other aspects of sliding friction. Consider a sliding block of mass M on a level surface
with a sliding coefficient of friction µ. The downward force of the block is the weight of
the block, W=Mg, and this force is exactly opposed by an upward force of the surface;
this means that the block does not accelerate in the vertical direction. The horizontal

                                              5
force is constant in magnitude, |Fs|=µW=µMg and the direction of this force is opposite to
the velocity which is taken to define the positive direction. This frictional force slows
down the sliding block according to the equation V˙ =-µg where the minus sign is due to
the direction of the force. It is interesting that this equation does not depend on the block
mass; several equations of motion in the following discussions will be similarly
independent of the ball masses. Integration over time gives V(t)=V0-µgt where V0 is the
initial velocity at t=0. Of course, this equation is valid only as long as the block is
sliding. Integration again over time gives the distance x as a function of time as
x=V0t-1⁄2µgt2 where the distance is measured from the starting point.
         Since the block is slowing down, kinetic energy is not conserved in this process.
This is a dissipative system, not a conservative system. How does the kinetic energy
depend on time and distance? Substitution of V(t) above gives
         T = 1⁄2MV2 = 1⁄2M(V20 – 2V0µgt + µ2g2t2 )
           =T0 – µMgx.
Kinetic energy is lost as a linear function of the distance and a quadratic function of time.
When the block slides to rest, T=0, the initial energy and total sliding distance d are
simply related as T0=µMgd. If the initial energy of the block were doubled, then the
distance that the block slides before coming to rest would also double. However, if the
initial velocity were doubled, then the final distance would increase by a factor of four.
Note also that for a given initial energy T0, if the coefficient of friction were to increase,
then the total sliding distance must decrease, and if the coefficient of friction were to
decrease, then the total sliding distance must increase. A related quantity of interest is the
power dissipation, defined as T˙ ≡ dTdt . From the quadratic time function, or using the
chain rule T˙ = dT dx , the power dissipation for a sliding block is seen to be T˙ =-µMgV.
                dx dt
The treatment of frictional forces for a sliding block are relatively simple; the somewhat
more complicated situations for a billiard ball sliding on a table and for two colliding
billiard balls are treated in the following sections.
        How can the coefficient of friction be measured? There are several possibilities,
depending on the equipment available with which to make measurements or on the data
available. (1) One method would be to attach a measuring scale to the block, and simply
measure the force required to slide the block on the surface without acceleration; this
force divided by the weight of the block would give directly the coefficient µ. (2) If the
surface can be held at an arbitrary slope, then µ can be determined as in P1.4. This may
not be always practical (for example if the surface is a heavy billiard table). (3) If the
velocity or the energy could be measured accurately at two points in a given trajectory,
then the equation T=T0-µMgx at these two points could be used to determine T0 and the
product µMg. An independent determination of the weight Mg would then allow µ to be
determined. However, velocities are relatively difficult to measure, so this also may not
be practical. (4) Suppose that the block slides a distance d in time t d before coming to

                                              6
rest. Then the initial velocity was V0=µgt d. Substitution of this into the quadratic
distance equation gives µ=d/( 1⁄2gtd2). Of course, this is not an exhaustive list of
possibilities, and many other schemes could be devised based on preparation of the initial
velocity or trajectory measurements of various types.
         A second force is the rolling resistance of a ball on the cloth. This is not, strictly
speaking, a sliding frictional force since it does not invlove sliding surfaces, but the
formal treatment of this force is similar to the above sliding frictional force. A detailed
examination of the forces involved in this situation will be postponed until the next
section. For the present discussion, this rolling resistance will be modeled as a ball
rolling uphill on an inclined plane. This is a conservative model. The dissipative energy
loss of an actual billiard ball is then considered to be analogous to the energy loss of the
model ball in the conservative gravity field. Because this model is a conservative system,
it is possible to determine the equations of motion of the ball without detailed
consideration of the forces (which may not be intuitively obvious for this situation).
         For an incline of slope å, the height above the starting point is given by
h=s sin(å), where s is the distance up the incline from the starting point. The potential
energy is then by given as a function of s by U(s)=Mgh=sMgsin(å). In this model it is
assumed that there is no energy dissipation through heat. The total energy E=T+U is a
constant, so any kinetic energy lost by the ball is transferred to potential energy in the
gravity field. This gives the relation T(s)=T0-sin(å)sMg, where T0=E is the initial energy
of the rolling ball at the bottom of the incline. It is now seen that the kinetic energy for a
ball rolling on an incline obeys the same equation as for the sliding block, but with the
incline slope, corresponding to sin(å), assuming the role of the sliding coefficient of
friction of the block. However, in the case of a rolling ball, the kinetic energy expression
is more complicated, and this, along with the examination of the associated forces, is
discussed in more detail in the following section. Using the chain rule expression, the
power dissipation for the ball rolling up an incline is given by T˙ = dT   ds
                                                                        ds dt =-sin(å)MgV,
where V is determined by the speed parallel to the incline. If, for some reason, it were not
possible to measure the slope of the incline, it could be determined indirectly by
measuring the sin(å) factor in the above equations in the same manner that the sliding
coefficient of friction µ can be measured for a sliding block.
        The connection between an actual ball rolling on a level table and this model
problem may be justified by considering the rolling ball at a microscopic level. The
nature of the effective frictional force arises in part from the compression of the cloth
fibers as the ball rolls past. Once compressed, they do not rebound immediately as the
ball passes; if they did, then there would be no energy lost in this manner by the rolling
ball. The energy lost by this irreversible compression of the fibers slows the rolling ball.
Energy of the rolling ball is also lost to vibrations of the ball and table, and eventually to
the increased temperature of the surroundings. As the ball rolls forward an infinitesimal
amount, it rolls also uphill on the cloth, losing a small amount of kinetic energy. But the

                                              7
cloth cannot support the ball weight, so it compresses the fibers. This transfers the
potential energy from the gravity field into the spring constants of these compressed
fibers. As the ball continues to roll, the fibers remain compressed for a small time, and
this time lag prevents the potential energy stored in the fibers from being returned to the
ball kinetic energy. The horizontal distance that the ball rolls on the table can be
measured, but the effective height that it would have risen if the cloth fibers had not
compressed cannot be measured directly. Therefore, the effective slope sin(å), which
may be associated with an effective rolling coefficient of friction µ eff       , must be
                                                                      (rolling)
determined indirectly.
        Consider a ball rolling a distance d on a table in time t before coming to a stop.
At this time, an effective force is assumed of the form Fr= µ eff        Mg that opposes the
                                                               (rolling)
rolling ball. Newton’s equation F = MV˙ may be rewritten as µ eff
                                     r                                      g=- V˙ .
                                                                      (rolling)
                                   eff
Integration over time results in µ (rolling)gt=V0–V where V0 is the initial velocity.
Integration over time again gives 1⁄2µ eff         gt2=V0t–d. The final velocity is zero when
                                         (rolling)
V0=µ eff       gt and this may be used to eliminate V0 from the distance equation. The
     (rolling)
effective coefficient of friction for the rolling ball may then be determined from the
equation
          eff           d
          (rolling) = 1 2
                      2 gt
The ball mass does not appear in this relation. The dimensionless quantity table speed is
defined as 1⁄µ eff       and is similarly independent of ball mass. With this definition of
               (rolling)
table speed, a very slow table is in the range of 50-70. Normal table speed is 80-100. A
very fast pool table might have a speed higher than 120. The cloth on a billiard table is
usually finer and smoother than that on a pool table, and a fast billiard table might have a
speed over 150. The force due to rolling resistance is much smaller than that due to
sliding friction.
         The sliding frictional force and the rolling frictional force of a ball on a table are
independent quantities. Consider for example a ball on a hard rubber surface; the sliding
friction would be very large, while the rolling resistance would be relatively small.
Alternatively, consider a ball on a Teflon surface with a soft backing; the sliding friction
would be relatively very small, while the rolling resistance would be relatively large. The
uniformity of billiard cloth material limits the range of extremes that are encountered in
practice. The official BCA (Billiard Congress of America) rules specify a billiard cloth
that is predominantly wool. The PBTA (Professional Billiard Tour Association)
requirements are even more specific, and detail a brand and type of billiard cloth, namely
Simonis 860; although this is partly a matter of sponsorship, it may be noted that this is a

                                               8
relatively fast pool table cloth that results typically in table speeds of 100 to 130 when
newly installed.

Problem 1.5: A ball is lagged perfectly on a standard 9' pool table and it is observed that
the ball travels from the foot cushion to the head cushion in 7.00 seconds. What is the
table speed? What was the initial velocity of the ball as it left the last cushion?
Answer: The playing area of a standard 9' pool table is 50" by 100". After accounting for
the ball width, the center of the ball travels (100"–2.25")=97.75" between cushions. The
acceleration due to gravity is g=386 in/s2. The table speed is

        TableSpeed =
                            1
                                     =
                                       1 gt 2
                                       2      =
                                                           ( ) ⋅ t = 1.97⋅ t
                                                0.5 ⋅386 in2
                                                         s
                                                                   2
                                                                           2
                                                      97.75(in )
                         eff                                               sec
                         (rolling)         d

                             (         )
                    = 1.97 ⋅ 7.00 2 = 96.7
This is a fairly fast pool table. It is customary to approximate the g/(2d)=1.97 factor as
2.0 on a 9' table. The table speed may then be estimated simply as 2t2 where the time is
measured in seconds. For playing purposes, it is usually unimportant to know the table
speed to more than 2 significant figures. The velocity after the last cushion was
                              2d 2(97.75in )
        V0 = eff(rolling) gt = t =      7.0s
                                                          ( )
                                               = 27.9 ins .

The initial velocity is seen to be twice the time-average velocity, which is given by d/t.

Exercise 1.1: Measure the table speed of some of the tables on which you play regularly.
Rather than try to lag a ball perfectly, set up a ramp with cue sticks, and adjust the height
of the ramp and initial ball placement so that the ball rebounds off the foot cushion and
stops just before touching the head cushion. Disregard the small time it takes for the ball
to achieve natural roll after impact with the foot cushion. Take the average time for
several rolls in order to account for timing inaccuracies.

        A third important frictional force is that between two colliding balls. The forces
between two balls change during the collision. The collision time is very short, so these
forces can be very large in order to transfer energy from one ball to another during a
collision. The frictional forces act in a direction tangential to the surface of the ball at the
point of contact between the balls. This is shown schematically in Fig. 1.1. The linear
forces that accelerate the balls are directed between the ball centers. The resultant force
on a ball is the sum of these two vector forces. That velocity component of a ball due to
the tangential frictional forces is called either collision induced throw or spin induced
throw, depending on the spinning condition of the balls and on the cut angles involved.
When two balls slide against each other, both balls are accelerated by frictional forces.
The frictional force vector that accelerates one ball is exactly opposite to that which
accelerates the other ball. Note however that the angular acceleration due to the frictional

                                                  9
forces has the same sign on both balls, due to the fact that the opposing forces are applied
to the front of one ball but to the back of the other. As before, to a good approximation
the frictional force is independent of the speed at which the two surfaces slide against
each other. The force is constant unless the spinning balls “lock” against each other (as
two interlocked gears), at which time the sliding frictional force vanishes.
                               F=FN + FT

                FN

                                                      FT

                                  ˙

                                      -FT

                                                           ˙

                                                                            -FN
       Fig. 1.1. The normal forces FN, tangential forces due to sliding friction FT ,
       the resulting total force F, and the angular acceleration ˙ are shown
       schematically for two colliding balls. The magnitudes of the forces
       change during the collision, but the ratio of the tangential and normal
       forces are constant and are determined by the coefficient of friction. The
       magnitude of the tangential forces are shown greatly exaggerated. Note
       that although the tangential forces acting on the two balls exactly oppose
       each other, the resulting angular accelerations have the same sign.

Problem 1.6: Two object balls are frozen together and aligned straight toward the foot
cushion exactly toward a marked spot. The nearest ball is 72" away from the cushion.
The farthest ball from the cushion is hit at an angle with the cue ball. The object ball is
observed to miss the point on the cushion by 4". Assuming that this collision induced
throw is due to friction, what is the coefficient of friction for these two balls?
Answer: FN is directed toward the marked spot, and FT is perpendicular as in Fig. 1.1.
The resultant velocity is parallel to the total force vector. The coefficient of friction is
related to the angle of throw å by

                                              10
                  FT        V       D
        tan( ) =      = = T = T
                  FN        V N DN
Substitution of the appropriate distances gives the coefficient of friction as
             4"
          =      = 0.0556
            72"

Exercise 1.2: Measure the collision induced throw angle for several sets of balls at pool
rooms where you play regularly. Generally, if the balls are worn or dirty, they will have a
high coefficient of friction, and if they are new or polished, they will have a low
coefficient of friction. Smear some chalk on the contact point between the frozen balls,
and an increased coefficient of friction should be observed. Smear some talcum powder
on the contact point, and a smaller coefficient of friction should be seen. Place a drop of
water (or spit) on the contact point and the coefficient of friction will become essentially
zero. Correcting for collision induced throw is one of the challenging aspects of playing
with different sets of balls in tournaments, and of playing at different pool rooms.

        A fourth frictional force is the static friction between the cue tip and the cue ball.
The cue tip must not slide on the cue ball. If this occurs unintentionally, then a miscue
results and the cue ball behaves unpredictably; if the cue tip slides intentionally against
the cue ball, then an illegal “push shot” has occurred. The static frictional force is related
to the normal force and to the static coefficient of friction by the relation µ static=FT /FN
where FT is the minimum force required to cause the cue tip to slide on the surface of the
cue ball.

Problem 1.7: For a particular cue tip, it is observed that miscues begin to occur when the
cue tip contacts the cue ball at a height halfway between the center and the top of the cue
ball. What is the static coefficient of friction between the cue tip and the cue ball? If the
static coefficient of friction is 1.0, what is the displacement at which miscues begin to
occur?
Answer: Refer to Fig. 1.2. The slope of the cue ball at the point of contact. is determined
by
                        b 
                         R
         cot( ) =
                           b 2
                    1 − 
                           R
where b is the displacement away from the center. When the force F is applied to the cue
ball in a horizontal direction, this may be written as a sum of the normal force toward the
center of the cue ball FN=Fsin(å), and the tangential frictional force with magnitude
FT =Fcos(å). The coefficient of friction and the maximum displacement are related by

                                              11
                                              bmax 
                    FT                         R 
         static =      = cot( ) =
                    FN                         b    2
                                           1 −  max 
                                                R 
         bmax 
                   =    static
          R        1 + 2static
For bmax/R=1⁄2,
                      1               1
         static =                 =      =.577
                          2
                     1− 1     4        3
For µstatic=1.0,
         bmax    1
                   =    =.707
          R         2
As seen for these two cases, a higher coefficient of friction allows the cue tip to contact
the cue ball at larger displacements without miscuing.

                                                  FT
                                                            FT = F cos(å)

                          F = FN + FT

                                                              b
                                                                   å
                      FN                           R

                                  FN = F sin(å)

       Fig. 1.2. The normal forces F N, tangential forces due to static friction FT ,
       and the resulting total force F for contact between the cue tip and cue ball
       are shown schematically. The magnitudes of the forces change during the
       collision, but the ratio of the tangential and normal forces are constant and
       are determined by the impact point and limited by the the static coefficient
       of friction.

Exercise 1.3: Determine the static coefficient of friction between your cue tip and a cue
ball. Instead of determining the point of miscue (as in P1.7), hold a ball against a cushion
and stand the cue shaft vertically on the ball. Estimate the distance away from the center
ball, and use the equation in P1.7 to determine µ static. Wipe the cue tip clean, removing

                                                       12
all chalk, and a smaller coefficient of friction should be observed. Experiment with
different kinds of chalk and with different tip conditions. Note that it is the displacement
of the actual contact point of the cue tip that should be measured, and not the
displacement of the cue shaft edge.

                                             13
2. Slide and Natural Roll
        Suppose that at some time a ball is known to have some (center of mass)
translational velocity and some spin (about the center of mass). For simplicity, assume
that the spin axis is horizontal and is perpendicular to the translational velocity (i.e. the
ball has straight topspin or draw; e.g. V=V ˆi and ∑=∑ ˆj ). As the ball slides on the cloth
on the table, the friction between the ball and cloth will cause both the translational and
angular velocity to change. This force will act to accelerate the ball, that is, to increase or
decrease the velocity, until an equilibrium situation occurs in which the translational and
angular velocities “match” each other, at which time the sliding frictional force becomes
zero. This is the natural roll (also called normal roll, smooth roll, or rolling without
slipping) situation. Over a small time dt, the distance traveled by the ball will be Vdt, and
the outside surface of the ball will roll a distance R∑dt relative to the ball center of mass.
Therefore, this “matching” occurs when V=R∑.
        The natural roll condition is important to examine because the speed and spin of a
sliding ball are always being forced toward the natural roll condition by the sliding
friction, and once achieved, natural roll is maintained by the ball until it collides with
another ball or cushion or rolls to a stop.

                                                                V

                                    ∑∑

                        F
       Fig. 2.1. The linear velocity V, angular velocity ∑, and corresponding
       frictional force F are shown schematically for a backspin shot. V is
       positive, whereas F and ∑ are taken to be negative as shown.

        Kinetic energy is not conserved during the equilibration period as the sliding ball
approaches the natural roll condition. This is easy to see in the case in which the
translational velocity and angular velocity oppose each other, as in a backspin shot
depicted in Fig. 2.1. (Positive ∑ is taken to be in the clockwise direction in Fig. 2.1.) In a
backspin shot, the initial frictional force acts to both slow down the ball and to decrease
the magnitude of the spin, clearly decreasing simultaneously both types of kinetic energy.
        A useful concept to introduce in this discussion is the spin/speed ratio ∑/V. In
some situations, a more useful quantity is the dimensionless ratio J=(R∑/V); for the above

                                              14
backspin shot, this is the ratio of velocity at a point on a ball on the rotational equator that
is due to the spin to the velocity of the center of mass of the ball. In situations in which
several spin components are examined simultaneously, the dimensionless vector quantity
J=(Jx,Jy,Jz)=R∑/V is useful. As discussed above Jy=+1 corresponds to the natural roll
condition when the velocity is directed along the x-axis.
        The frictional force acts on the very bottom point of the ball, where the ball
touches the cloth, and it points in a horizontal direction. The force acts to accelerate the
ball according to the equation F = MV   ˙ . Integrated over some time period, this gives a
change of momentum
        Ft = M( V − V0 ) .
in which V0 is the initial velocity vector. Note that since F and V point in opposite
directions in a backspin shot; the ball slows down over time. When F and V point in the
same direction, e.g. a ball over-spinning with topspin, the ball speeds up over time. In the
case depicted in Fig. 2.1, this equation simplifies to
         |F|t=-M(V-V0)
or, after eliminating the mass from both side of the equation and introducing the ball-
cloth sliding coefficient of friction,
         µgt =-(V-V0)
where the sign of the right hand sides results from the fact that the velocity and force
vectors point in opposite directions. (In the general case for positive V 0, F>0 when
R∑0>V0, and F<0 when R∑0<V0 or in other words, F and (J-1) have the same sign.)
         The angular velocity of the sliding ball changes according to the equation
r × F = I ∑˙ . For the backspin shot, r=-R kˆ , F=-|F| ˆi , and ∑˙ = ˙ˆj . In this situation, this
equation simplifies to RF = I ˙ . Integrated over some time period, this gives
          RF t = I( − 0 ) .
Note in Fig. 2.1 that for a backspin shot the frictional force is acting to increase the
angular velocity from an initial negative value to a final positive value. If the cue ball
contacts an object ball while the angular velocity is still negative, this is called a draw
shot. If all the spin is removed by the cloth friction and the ball is spinning neither
forward nor backward upon impact with an object ball, this is called a stun shot. If
forward roll, or in particular natural roll, is achieved prior to collision, this is called a
drag shot. As shown in the above equation, it is the initial angular velocity, the sliding
friction between the ball and the cloth, and the time before the collision that distinguishes
these three shots.
Problem 2.1: What is the relation between linear and angular velocity for a sliding ball?
Answer: Eliminating the common |F|t from the above two expressions gives
         I
           ( − 0 ) = − M(V − V 0 ) .
         R
Using the previous expression for I for a ball results in
         V = V0 − 25 R( − 0 ) .

                                               15
This expression is valid at any time the ball is sliding on the cloth. Although derived
specifically for the backspin shot, this expression is valid for any frictional force. Note
that for the backspin shot, V decreases as ∑ increases, and for the over-top-spin situation,
V increases as ∑ decreases. This shows that the relation between linear and angular
velocity does not depend on the ball mass or on the ball-cloth sliding coefficient of
friction.

Problem 2.2: Determine the final linear velocity of a ball after natural roll is achieved as
a function of initial linear and angular velocities.
Answer: Natural roll is achieved when the linear and angular velocities equilibrate.
Substituting V=R∑ in the expression from P2.1 gives
        V NR = 57 V0 + 27 R 0
Note that if the initial angular velocity were zero, then the sliding ball would eventually
slow down to 5/7 of its initial velocity. If the initial angular velocity matched exactly the
initial linear velocity, V0=R∑0, then the linear velocity would remain unchanged. If the
initial angular velocity is negative, as for a drag shot, then the final linear velocity is even
less than 5/7 of the initial velocity; for example, if the initial angular velocity is equal to
natural roll, but in the opposite direction, V0=-R∑0, then the final velocity is 3/7 of the
initial velocity. If the initial spin is very large and negative, then the final natural roll
velocity will be negative; this can occur in masse shots, or in situations involving
collisions with other balls. Note that the natural roll velocity does not depend on the ball-
cloth friction or the ball mass.

Exercise 2.1: Experiment with the drag shot. Use a striped ball in place of the cue ball so
that the spin is easily observed. Strike the “cue” ball below center. Observe how the ball
initially spins backward. The cloth friction slows this backspin until at some point the
ball is not rotating at all, but is simply sliding across the table. Beyond this point the ball
begins rolling forward. At some point all sliding stops, and the ball achieves natural roll.
During all of the time that the ball is sliding on the cloth, the speed of the ball is
decreasing. If you have a video camera, record some of these shots and play them back
in slow motion. The drag shot is useful when playing on dirty or unlevel tables, and a
low-speed impact between the cue ball and object ball is required for position. The initial
high speed of the cue ball reduces the effect of the unlevel table, and only at the very end
after natural roll is achieved and the velocity is reduced to about 3/7 of the initial velocity,
does the impact occur. The average velocity of the cue ball is about 5/7 of the initial
velocity, which means that the effect of the unlevel table has been reduced by about 2/7 or
29% from the case where natural roll is achieved immediately.

Exercise 2.2: Experiment with a stun shot. A stun shot is when the cue ball has zero
angular velocity about the horizontal axis upon contact with an object ball or cushion.

                                               16
Set up a straight-in shot with an object ball, and place the cue ball at various distances
away from the object ball. (Use a striped ball in place of the cue ball so that the spin can
be easily observed.) For a given distance and shot speed, shoot with just the right amount
of backspin so that the cloth friction has time to remove the spin. The cue ball should
stop exactly upon impact, and roll afterwards neither forward nor backward. For a fixed
distance, the slower the shot speed, the more extreme will be the backspin required to
achieve a stun shot impact. Experiment with stun shots on different tables. Sticky tables
(high sliding friction between the cloth and ball) require more extreme backspin than
slick tables to achieve stun. Stun shots are important for position play and, as discussed
in later sections, for judging accurate carom angles.

Problem 2.3: What is the shape of the path taken by a sliding ball before natural roll is
achieved? What is the shape of the path after natural roll is achieved?
Answer: Integration of F = MV      ˙ twice gives
         1 Ft 2 = M(q − q − V t)
         2                   0     0
                             1
        q = q 0 + V0t +         Ft 2
                            2M
Since the choice of coordinate axes is arbitrary, assume that the axes origin corresponds
to t=0, and that the axes are oriented so that the x-component of the sliding force is zero.
The coordinates of the path are then given by
         x =  V 0x  t + 1 t 2  0  =  V 0x  t +  1 0  t 2
         y  V 0y  2M  F0y   V0y   2 g
Because of the choice of axes, the velocity in the x-direction remains unchanged over
time. Using the relation t=x/V0x to eliminate t from the y part of this equation gives
              V0y              
         y=         x +  g2  x 2
              V 0x       2V 0x 
which may be recognized as an equation for a parabola. While the ball is sliding on the
cloth, the path of the ball is a parabola, the shape of which is determined by the initial
velocity and by the frictional force between the ball and the cloth. This path does not
depend on the ball mass. This frictional force remains unchanged in both direction and
magnitude as long as the ball is sliding. This applies to the paths taken by balls after
collisions with cushions or with other balls, and also to the cue ball when struck with an
elevated cue stick (i.e. masse or semi-masse shots). The ball is accelerated by the sliding
force until natural roll is achieved. After natural roll is achieved, there is no sideways
force exerted to further accelerate the ball, so the ball rolls in a straight line.

Problem 2.4: When a ball achieves natural roll, what fraction of its kinetic energy is
translational and what fraction is rotational?
Answer: The total kinetic energy is

                                             17
       T = T(Trans) + T(Rot) = 1⁄2MV2 + 1⁄2I∑2 = 1⁄2MV2 + 1⁄5MV2 = 7⁄10MV2.
This gives
        T(Trans) 5
                 =
           T       7
        T(Rot ) 2
               =
          T      7

        Now that the total kinetic energy expression for a natural roll ball is known, the
issue of rolling resistance can be examined in more detail. The previous conservative
model of a ball rolling up an inclined plane will be used to understand the various forces
involved. In the case of a ball rolling without slipping up an inclined plane, the result of
these forces is known, namely that R∑ =V is maintained as the ball slows down, but the
forces themselves required to achieve this result are not obvious. In order to apply
Newton’s laws directly, these forces must be known beforehand. Therefore Lagrange’s
equations of motion will be used. The generalized coordinates will be taken to be the
distance up the incline s, the angular rotation of the ball œ, and the undetermined
multiplier associated with the constraint equation, ¬. The expressions for the kinetic
energy, potential energy, and the constraint equation are
        T = 1⁄2MVs2 + 1⁄2I∑2
        U = sMgsin(å)
        f(s,œ) = Rœ – s = 0
The Lagrangian is L=T–U+¬f, and the equations of motion are determined from the
             L d L
equation,       −        = 0 , for the three coordinates s, œ, and ¬. Substitution gives the
             qi dt q˙i
three equations
        –Mgsin(å) – ¬ – M V˙ s = 0
        ¬R – I ˙ = 0
        Rœ – s = 0 .
Differentiating the last equation twice gives R ˙ = V˙ s. Solving the second equation for
the undetermined multiplier gives ¬=I V˙ s/R2. Substitution into the first equation then
gives

                  (        )
                          −1
       M V˙ s = – 1 + I 2    Mgsin(å) = –5⁄7 Mgsin(å)
                      MR
               = –Mgsin(å) + 2⁄7Mgsin(å)                        [rolling without slipping]
               = Fgravity + Fconstraint
If, instead of rolling without slipping, the ball were allowed to slide freely, then Newton’s
equation of motion in this coordinate system would have been simply
         M V˙ s = Fgravity = –Mgsin(å)                                 [with free slipping]
Therefore the sliding ball is seen to slow down faster than the rolling ball, all other things
being the same. The effective force arising from the static coefficient of friction between

                                             18
the ball and the incline is seen to be 2⁄7Mgsin(å), and this force is directed uphill,
opposing the gravitational force. Because there is no sliding associated with this
frictional force, there is no energy dissipation in this model system. The only kinetic
energy lost is that associated with the corresponding increase in potential energy. As was
done in the previous section for a sliding block, an association with the effective slope
and a coefficient of friction is made, µ (rolling) =sin(å). In the previous section, an
equation of motion was assumed of the form µ eff             g=- V˙ s. It is now seen that this
                                                   (rolling)
assumption was correct, with the association

                     (         )            (         )
                             −1                  −1
       µ eff       = 1 + I
                           2    sin(å) = 1 + I
                                               2    µ (rolling) = 5⁄7µ (rolling)
         (rolling)        MR                     MR
When should µ eff       be used, and when should µ (rolling) be used? The answer is that
              (rolling)
for a rolling billiard ball, it doesn’t matter which coefficient of friction is used, provided
of course, that it is used with the corresponding equation of motion. The use of the
equation of motion involving µ (rolling) has the advantage that once it has been
determined for one object, the same value can be used for other objects made of the same
material but with different shapes, such as rolling cylinders, rolling tubes, rings, or
hollow balls. The quantity µ (rolling) is therefore, in some sense, more fundamental than
is µ eff       . The motion of these objects will of course be slightly different, due to the
     (rolling)
dependence on the moment of inertia of the equations of motion, as demonstrated in the
following problem.

Problem 2.5: The table used in P1.5 is moved to the surface of the moon. The billiard
ball is replaced with a cylinder made of the same material as a billiard ball. How long
will it take for the cylinder to roll the length of the table?
Answer: First determine µ (rolling) for the table from the previous data:
                                          7
         µ (rolling) = 7⁄5µeff       =         = 0.0145
                           (rolling)   5 ⋅96.7
For a solid cylinder, I=MR2/2. gmoon=63.8in/s2, about 1/6 the gravity of the earth. The
equation of motion is

               (          )
                       −1
        V˙ = – 1 + I 2    gmoonµ (rolling)
                     MR
Integration twice over time, then solving for t gives

        t=
               (
              2 1+    I d
                     MR 2 ) =           3⋅ 97.75in
                                                          = 17.8s
             gmoon rolling         63.8(in / s2 )⋅ 0.0145
Solving the same equation for a ball gives t=17.2s, a result that may also be obtained
simply by scaling the earth time, 7.00s by the factor gearth gmoon = 2.46 . Therefore,
most of the lag time difference is due to the different gravitational forces of the earth and

                                                19
moon, with a smaller difference due to the different moments of inertia of the cylinder
and ball.

Problem 2.6: Taking into account both the sliding friction and the rolling resistance,
what is the total distance traveled by a cue ball with V0=0 as a function of the initial spin
R∑0? (neglect collisions with other balls and cushions)
Answer: As discussed in more detail in the following sections, V0=0 is the appropriate
initial condition immediately after the cue ball collides head-on with an object ball; the
object ball removes the velocity of the cue ball, but leaves its spin unchanged. According
to P2.2, this spin then accelerates the cue ball to the natural roll velocity VNR=2⁄7R∑0.
The time required to achieve natural roll is given by
                2R 0
         t NR =
                 7 sg
where µ s is the sliding friction coefficient and ∑0 is taken to be positive. The distance
covered by the sliding cue ball during this time is
                        2    2( R 0 )2
         d NR = 2 s gt NR =
                 1                      .
                               49 s g
Upon achieving natural roll, the equation of motion is then determined by the rolling
resistance. The total rolling time is given by
                  V
         t R = eff NR
                (rolling) g
and the total rolling distance is given by
                             eff          2        V 2NR      2( R 0 )2
        d R = V NRt R − 12   (rolling) gt R =     eff       =                .
                                                2 (rolling)g 49 eff
                                                                 (rolling) g
The total distance for both the slide and the roll is
                                                               
                                    2  2  1           1
        dtotal = dNR + dR = ( R 0 )               + eff        .
                                        49g   s    (rolling) 
This equation holds for both topspin and draw shots. An important point to notice is that
the total distance is proportional to the square of the initial spin. This explains why it is
much easier to position the cue ball accurately on a stop shot than on a strong draw or
force-follow shot; a small variation in the initial spin is magnified into a larger distance
for large initial R∑0 than for a small initial R∑0.

                                                     20
3. Cue Tip/Cue Ball Impact
         Consider the situation in which a level cue stick strikes the cue ball. The cue tip
applies a force to the cue ball at some point on the surface of the ball. This contact time
is not instantaneous, but it is very short. Unlike a ball-to-ball impact (characterized by
small tangential frictional forces and therefore resulting in a force that is directed
essentially between the centers of the balls), the cue tip does not slip on the cue ball
(except of course in a miscue situation). With these assumptions, the force is directed
along the direction of the cue shaft. The angular acceleration from this force is given by
the equation r × F = I ∑˙ . When a level cue stick strikes the cue ball, the angular
acceleration along the direction of force, F/|F|, is given by
             F
                 (          )    F
         ∑˙ ⋅ = I −1( r × F) ⋅ = 0 .
             F                   F
There is no component of angular acceleration around the axis of the cue stick, so there is
no sideways frictional force between the ball and the cloth; the cue ball slides in a straight
line in the direction of the cue shaft, while rotating about either or both the vertical axis
(i.e. sidespin) and the horizontal axis perpendicular to the cue shaft (i.e. topspin or draw).
This results from the fact that the moment of inertia for a pool ball is proportional to the
unit matrix. (If the inertia tensor of an object is not proportional to the unit matrix, e.g. if
the ball has an embedded off-center weight, then it will in general curve as it slides or
rolls instead of moving in a straight line.)
         First consider the case in which the cue tip strikes the cue ball exactly in the
center. In this situation r × F = 0 = I ∑˙ , and there is no angular velocity imparted directly
to the cue ball. The only thing that occurs is a transfer of linear momentum and
translational energy between the cue stick and the cue ball. It will be assumed that the
contact time is so short that the hand/skin/cuestick effects can be ignored. That is, at the
very beginning of the contact time, the cue stick slows down and starts moving slower
than the hand, and the skin begins to tighten, but by the time any significant extra force is
exerted on the cue stick, the cue ball has already departed and lost contact with the cue
tip.

Problem 3.1: What is the relation between the cue stick energy and velocity, the length
of the stroke, and the applied force? (Assume a constant force is applied by the hand to
the cue stick during the stroke.)
Answer: Integration of the equation F = MsV˙ over time gives Ft = Ms (V − V 0 ) = MsV
where F is the force applied to the stick and Ms is the mass of the cue stick. Integration
again gives 12 Ft 2 = Ms ( x − x0 ) = Msd in which d is the distance of the stroke. Solving
the first equation for t and substitution into the second gives for the kinetic energy
         T = 1⁄2MsV2 = Fd.
Solving for V gives

                                              21
              2Fd
        V=
              Ms
The cue stick energy is proportional to the stroke length and to the applied force, and the
cue stick velocity is proportional to the square root of the stroke length and of the applied
force. It is important to note that in the expression T=Fd, the energy does not depend on
the mass of the cue stick. This means that for a given force on the cue stick and a given
stroke length, a light cue stick will acquire the same energy as a heavy cue stick.

Problem 3.2: What is the relation between the final cue ball velocity and initial and final
cue stick velocity, and the mass of the cue stick?
Answer: Before the impact, only the cue stick has momentum MsV0 and energy 1⁄2MsV02.
After the collision, both the cue stick and the cue ball have energy and momentum.
Conservation of momentum and energy, assuming a center-ball impact, give
        MsV 0 = MsV s + MbV b
        1 M V 2 = 1 M V 2 + 1 M V2
        2 s 0     2 s s     2 b b          .
Solve the first equation for Vs, and substitute into the second equation to obtain
                 2Ms
         Vb =            V
               Ms + Mb 0
               M − Mb
         Vs = s          V
               Ms + Mb 0
         Vb       2Ms
             =
          Vs Ms − Mb
A typical cue stick weighs 18oz, or about three times the weight of a pool ball. In this
case, Vb=3⁄2V0, Vs=1⁄2V0, and Vb/Vs=3, so the cue ball is moving about 3 times faster than
the cue stick immediately after impact. If the masses were exactly equal (a very light cue
stick), then the final ball velocity would be equal to the initial stick velocity, and the final
stick velocity would be zero; all of the energy would be transferred from the stick to the
ball. If the stick mass were less than the ball mass, then the final stick velocity would be
in the opposite direction to the initial stick velocity; that is, the stick would bounce back
from the cue ball. Under no condition does Vb=Vs; that is, there does not exist a
combination of cue stick mass and ball mass such that both are moving forward
immediately after impact at the same velocity.

Problem 3.3: What is the fraction of energy that is transferred from the cue stick to the
cue ball as a function of the stick and ball masses?
Answer: Using the final stick and ball velocities from P3.2 gives
        Tb = 12 MbV b2 =
                            4Mb Ms
                         ( Ms + Mb )
                                       (      2
                                                )
                                     2 2 Ms V 0 =
                                        1             4Mb Ms
                                                   ( Ms + Mb )
                                                               2 T0

Let ås=Ms/Mb be the stick to ball mass ratio. Then the ratio of energies is given by

                                               22
        Tb   4 s
           =
        T0 (1+ s )2
When ås=1, then this energy ratio is unity, in agreement with the conclusions in P3.2.
When there is a mismatch of masses, this energy ratio is less than one and the efficiency
of transfer of energy in the collision is reduced.

         If a 6oz cue stick results in optimal transfer of energy, then why not use one? If it
is not optimal, then what is? There are two separate components to the answer. First, it
is not always the most efficient transfer of energy that is important, but rather control of
the energy that is transferred to the cue ball. It is easier to control a heavier stick than an
extremely light one, and the inherent inefficiency from the mass difference is a way to
reduce errors in the speed of the cue ball. A possible exception to this is the break shot in
open-break games such as 8-ball and 9-ball in which the maximization of cue ball energy
is desired. This leads to the second component of the answer.
         As the bicep contracts to accelerate the cue stick on the break stroke, both the
mass of the forearm and cue stick mass are accelerated. To understand how this affects
the final object ball energy in at least a qualitative manner, some simplifying assumptions
may be imposed. Assume that the forearm is a thin rod of uniform mass. The moment of
inertia of the forearm would be M fL2/3 where M f is the mass of the forearm and L is the
forearm length. The moment of inertia of the cue stick about the elbow is MsL2. As both
the arm and stick are accelerated about the elbow by a constant force F for an angle œ, the
total energy is given by T=FLœ. For a given stroke length Lœ and force F, the total
kinetic energy is independent of the cue stick and forearm masses. Writing the two parts
of the energy explicitly gives
                                                           Mf 
         T = T0 + T f = 12 Ms L 2 + 16 M f L 2 = T0  1 +        
                                                           3Ms 
where T0 is the cue stick energy. Although T, the total kinetic energy of the arm and
stick, is fixed by T=FLœ, the fractional division of this energy between the stick and arm
is seen to be determined by the mass ratio. It is interesting in this expression that the only
important factor is the mass ratio of the forearm and stick; the length of the forearm does
not matter, at least within the current set of simplifying assumptions. This means that the
optimal cue stick weight will be the same for tall players as for short players, provided
the forearm masses are the same. Some players pivot their arm from the shoulder rather
than the elbow on the break shot. The above analysis indicates that the additional arm
length is irrelevant, but with this technique the entire arm mass rather than simply the
forearm mass must be included into the Mf term. Whether this is beneficial or not
depends also on the relative forces applied by the different muscle groups involved in the
two stroke techniques.

                                              23
        The dilemma is now apparent from the above equation and P3.3. In order to
achieve the highest transfer of energy from the cue stick to the cue ball, a very light 6oz
cue stick would be necessary. But in order to maximize the cue stick energy T0 for a
fixed total energy T during the stroke, a very large cue stick mass would be necessary.
Consequently, maximization of the cue ball energy requires some kind of compromise
between these two extremes.
        The quantity T0 is the cue stick energy at the end of the stroke, and P3.3 gives the
relation between T0 and the cue ball energy Tb. The combination of these relations gives
        Tb             4Mb Ms2                      4 2s
             =                           =
         T                  (            )
               (Mb + Ms ) Ms + 1 M f (1 + s ) s + 1 f
                         2
                                     3
                                                   2
                                                     (     3    )
In the last expression, ås=Ms/Mb is the ratio of the stick mass to ball mass, and åf=Mf/Mb
is the forearm to ball mass ratio. For a given forearm mass, the optimum stick mass is
determined by differentiating the above expression with respect to ås, setting the result to
zero, and solving for ås as a function of åf. The final expression is
         s (opt ) = 2 +
                    1     1 +2
                          4 3    f
which is an equation for a parabola. When åf=0, it is seen that ås(opt)=1, and the optimal
cue stick mass would be 6oz, a result which agrees with the conclusions from P3.3. A
light forearm mass might be 24oz, which corresponds to åf=4, ås(opt)=2.2, and an optimal
cue stick mass of 13.2oz. A typical forearm mass might be 36oz, which corresponds to an
optimal stick weight of 15.4oz. A heavy forearm mass might be 64oz, which corresponds
to an optimal stick weight of 19.3oz. A person who breaks with his entire arm, pivoting
at the shoulder rather than the elbow, might have an arm mass of 150oz, which
corresponds to an optimal stick weight of 27.2oz.
        In the last few years, many professional 9-ball players have switched from heavy
break cues to lighter break cues. These players may still use a typical 19-20oz cue for
their normal strokes in a game, but they break with a lighter 15-18oz break cue. Break
cues of this weight are consistent with the above equations, elbow pivots rather than
shoulder pivots, and slim to medium body types. The actual breaking technique used by
these players is more complicated than that considered above, and involves pivots about
both the shoulder and the elbow.

Problem 3.4: What is the spin/speed ratio of the cue ball immediately after contact as a
function of the vertical cue tip contact point?
Answer: For simplicity assume that the contact point is in the vertical plane through the
center of the cue ball. When the cue tip applies a force in an off-center hit, the force
accelerates the center of mass, and the resulting momentum is p=MV. The linear
                                              t
momentum is given by the expression p =      ∫0F(t′ )dt′ in which the force is not constant
during the contact time and t is the (very short) contact time between the cue tip and the

                                              24
cue ball. (An ideal impulsive force is one that integrates to a constant momentum change
as the contact time decreases. A cue tip contacting a cue ball and a hammer driving a nail
are two examples of nearly ideal impulsive forces.) Integrating the angular acceleration
equation in the same way gives pRsin(œ)=pb=I∑. The quantity b=Rsin(œ) is the impact
parameter, and is the vertical offset away from a center-ball hit. b is positive for an
above-center hit, zero for a center ball hit, and negative for a below-center hit.
Eliminating the linear momentum p from these two sets of equations gives
                I     2MR 2
         MV =       =
                  b      5b
             R  5 b
         J =       =
               V  2  R
If b=0, then the angular velocity ∑ is also zero, which means that there is no spin
imparted with a center-ball hit of the cue tip. If the cue tip hits above center, then b is
positive and ∑=∑y is positive, which means that the ball is rolling in the same direction as
the velocity. If the cue tip hits below center, then b is negative and ∑ is negative, which
means that the cue ball is spinning in the opposite direction as in a draw or drag shot.
Note that the above equations are valid only for -R≤b≤R, or else b is meaningless; the cue
tip would miss the cue ball. For practical reasons, b is restricted even more due to the
fact that contact points close to the edge of the cue ball result in miscues (see P1.7).
Although determined above for angular velocity about the horizontal axis, the same
equation applies to angular velocity about the vertical axis resulting from a horizontal
impact parameter, or, in fact, to any arbitrary angular velocity axis.

Problem 3.5: At what vertical contact point b NR will the cue ball have natural roll?
Answer: Natural roll occurs when V=R∑y. Substitution into the above equation gives
      bNR = 25 R
Noting that the height above the cloth is given by z=R+b, this point may also be written
       zNR = 75 R = 10
                     7 D

where D=2R is the height of the ball. This point is actually rather high on the cue ball,
and it is risky to attempt to hit higher than this due to the possibility of miscuing (see
P1.7). Sidespin that is imparted to the cue ball with a level stick has no effect on natural
roll, so the set of points on the cue ball for which natural roll is achieved immediately
with no sliding are along the horizontal line at a height 7⁄10D above the table surface.

Exercise 3.1: Experiment with shots involving natural roll impact points. Use a striped
object ball in place of the cue ball. Orient the ball so that the plane defined by the stripe
center is tilted at various angles away from vertical. The cue stick should be held as level
as possible and should be within the plane defined by the stripe. The cue tip contact point
should be exactly in the center of the stripe at a height 7⁄10D above the table. When

                                             25
executed correctly, the stripe will appear “stationary” as the ball rolls. A small error in
the contact point, or in the ball setup, will result in a small wobble of the stripe on the
rolling ball.

            a                                            b
                            z                                          z

     y                                             y
         Fig. 3.1. The cue tip contact points corresponding to various arbitrary
         sidespin/speed ratios are denoted by the thin lines as viewed from the rear
         of the cue ball. Figure a denotes constant spin/speed ratios immediately
         after contact with the cue tip; these are vertical straight lines. Figure b
         denotes constant spin/speed ratios after natural roll is achieved; these are
         straight lines that all intersect at the point (y,z)=(0,0). In both cases, the
         larger offsets from the center are associated with higher spin/speed ratios.

Problem 3.6: Which cue tip contact points will result in the same sidespin/speed ratios
immediately after contact with the cue tip? Which contact points will result in the same
sidespin/speed ratios after the cue ball achieves natural roll?
Answer: Consider the coordinate axes in Fig. 3.1. The z-coordinate is the height above
the cloth, and the y-coordinate is the distance away from the vertical plane through the
center of the ball. by =y is the horizontal impact parameter, and bz=(z-R) is the vertical
impact parameter. Denote the point of contact with coordinates (y,z). In terms of the
linear momentum p, the initial forward velocity and forward rotation are given by
               p
        V0 =
              M
                p(z − R) 5p(z − R)
          0y =            =             .
                    I         2MR2
The forward rotation depends only on the height of the cue tip contact point z and not on
the sideways displacement y. Upon achieving natural roll, the final forward velocity (see
P2.2) is given by
                                   5p 5p(z − R) 5p  z 
        V NR = 57 V0 + 27 R 0y =       +           =            .
                                   7M       7MR       7M  R 
The sidespin (i.e. the angular velocity about the vertical axis) is assumed to be unchanged

                                              26
by the frictional forces of the sliding ball. From P3.4, the initial, and final, sidespin about
the z-axis is given by
                 5y          5yp
            z =     2 V 0 =        .
                  2R          2R2 M
The sidespin depends only on the horizontal displacement, y. The sidespin/speed ratio for
the initial velocity is given by
                R z 5y
         Jz =         =
                 V0     2R
This ratio depends only on the horizontal impact parameter y, and is independent of the
ball speed V0 and vertical contact point z. The same ratio would occur with a soft hit as
with a very hard hit.
         Taking the ratio of the sidespin and final natural roll velocity gives
                    R z 7 y
         J z,NR =         =
                    V NR 2  z 
where J z,NR is the desired spin/speed ratio. The set of points (y,z) that correspond to the
same Jz,NR are given by the straight line defined by
               7 
         z=            y
               2J z,NR 
The lines corresponding to several J z,NR are shown in Fig. 3.1. It is interesting that
exactly the same effect may be obtained by striking the cue ball at any point on a given
straight line, provided the cue ball has sufficient time to achieve natural roll through
sliding friction. For a desired final velocity, a higher initial velocity is required for small-
z contact points in order to overcome the drag. Note that higher sidespin/speed ratios
(larger Jz,NR) are associated with straight lines closer to horizontal, and smaller ratios
(smaller J z,NR) are associated with more vertical slopes.

Problem 3.7: Of the set of points (y,z). that correspond to a constant natural-roll
spin/speed ratio Jz,NR, which point (y0,z0) corresponds to the smallest displacement from
center ball?
Answer: Consider Fig. 3.2. All the points a given distance from center ball will form a
circle. The smallest circle that touches the desired straight line, as determined in P3.6,
will define the smallest displacement that gives the desired spin/speed ratio. The point at
which this smallest circle touches the appropriate straight line is denoted (y0,z0). At this
point, the curve defining the circle and the straight line will be tangent, and the three
points (0,0), (0,R), and (y0,z0) will form a right triangle. Let å be the angle away from
vertical as indicated in Fig. 3.2. The tangent of this angle is given by tan(å)=y0/z0, and
also by tan(å)=(R-z0)/y0. Equating these two expressions gives
         y02 = z0 (R − z0 ).
Completing the square on the right hand side of this equation and rearranging gives

                                               27
             (
        y02 + z0 − 12 R   )2 = ( 12 R)2 .
This is recognized as the equation for a circle of radius 12 R centered at the point (0, 12 R ).
Contacting these points with the cue tip is called aiming on the small circle. When a
player aims on the small circle, and the cue ball subsequently achieves natural roll, the
desired spin/speed ratio J z,NR is achieved with the minimal displacement from center ball.
It is possible to achieve much higher spin/speed ratios when the cue ball is allowed to
achieve natural roll than the ratios that can be obtained immediately after cut tip contact
as demonstrated in the following problem.

                                                    z

                                                                              Line of constant
                                                                              spin/speed ratio
                                                (0,R)                         contact points

                                     R-z0
                                                             (y0,z0)

 “Small Circle”
 of aim points
                                                å                 Point of minimal
             y                                                    displacement from center

                                        (0,0)
        Fig. 3.2. The set of points that correspond to the minimal displacements
        from center ball for various spin/speed ratios after natural roll is achieved
        fall on a small circle of radius R/2 that touches the bottom point of the cue
        ball.

Problem 3.8: What is the natural roll sidespin/speed ratio, R∑ z/VNR, for the equatorial
                                       (        )
cue tip contact point P1=(y1,z1)= 1 R, R ? What is the natural roll sidespin/speed ratio
                                            2
                                       (        )
for the contact point P2=(y2,z2)= 12 R, 12 R ? At what contact points P3=(y3,z3) would the
initial spin/speed ratio, R∑z/Vo, be the same as the natural roll spin/speed ratio of P2?
Answer: From P3.6 the natural roll spin/speed ratio for P 1 is given by

                                                        28
         R z  7  y1 
               =   = 7 = 2.475
         V NR  2  z1  2 2
The natural roll spin/speed ratio for P 2 is
        R z  7  y1  7
              =   = = 3.5
        V NR  2  z1  2
Although the displacements away from center of these two points are the same, namely
R 2 , the sidespin/speed ratio for the second point is over 41% larger than the first
point. The second point P2 is on the “small circle” and therefore results in the maximal
natural roll sidespin/speed ratio for this displacement distance.
        In order to achieve a comparable initial sidespin/speed ratio
         7 R z 5 y
           =       =  
         2     V0    2 R

                        (
        P3 = (y3 ,z3 ) = 75 R,z   )
However, the set of points P 3 are not on the cue ball. Therefore, it is impossible to
achive such a large sidespin/speed ratio without taking advantage of the drag to reduce
the ball velocity. For practical purposes, a sidespin/speed ratio of 3.5 is about as large as
can be attained with a cue tip impact with a level cue stick. Larger ratios can be achieved
only with elevated cue stick strokes (masse) or with collisions involving other balls.

        It is sometimes convenient to think of the cue ball spin and velocity at any
moment in time for a sliding ball in terms of an “effective cue tip contact point”. That is,
for a given linear and angular velocity of a cue ball, there exists a contact point on the cue
ball at which, if the cue tip where to strike a stationary ball at that point, with the correct
velocity, the result would be to match, or to reproduce, exactly the same spin and speed.
Because the linear and angular velocities change as the ball slides, the effective contact
point is time dependent. From P3.6, the horizontal and vertical components of the spin
are related to the vertical and horizontal components of the impact parameter of the cue
tip contact point according to
         5  by  R z
               eff
                                R 0z
                  =      =
         2 R         V      (V0 − gt )
        5  bz  R y
          
             eff
                 =   =
                             (
                        R 0y + 52 gt           )
        2 R       V    (V 0 − gt )
where the time dependence of the angular and linear velocities due to the cloth friction on
the sliding ball from Section 2 have been used. The origin t=0 is taken in the above
equations to be the time at which the cue tip strikes the ball.

                                                   29
Problem 3.9: Show that the set of effective contact points corresponding to b yeff(t) and
bzeff(t) for a sliding ball lie on a straight line passing through the coordinate points
(y,z)=(0,0) and (y,z)=(byeff(0),R+bzeff(0)).
Answer: Let bzeff be considered as a function of b yeff and defined parametrically through
the time variable t. Solve the first equation above for t in terms of b yeff, and substitute
into the second to give
        ( R + bzeff (t)) = ( R + bzeff (0 ))
            y (t )
           beff                 y (0 )
                               beff
The right hand side of this equation is time independent. Therefore, the slope of the
curve defined by the points (y,z)=(byeff(t),R+bzeff(t)) is a constant, independent of time,
and the set of time-dependent effective contact points lie on a straight line. The distance
(R+bzeff(t)) is the height of the tip contact point above the cloth as seen for example in
Fig. 3.2, and the distance byeff(t) is the horizontal tip displacement. Therefore, the line
passing through the point (0,0) at the bottom of the ball to the initial point
(byeff(0),R+bzeff(0)) has the same slope as the rest of the line. The line segment of
effective contact points ends when bzeff(t)=2⁄5R, at which time the ball achieves natural
roll.

         The result of P3.9 allows the player to compensate accurately for the effects of
table friction on the spin axis with the following approach. First determine the desired
spin axis at the eventual position of the cue ball. A stun shot for example, which is a
frequent goal, would have a vertical spin axis at the time the cue ball collides with the
object ball. This spin axis corresponds to some effective contact point (byeff(t),R+bzeff(t)).
In the case of a stun shot, this point would have coordinates (b yeff(t),R) and correspond to
pure sidespin. The player must then estimate, based on shot speed and the cloth friction,
the required vertical offset below center in order to achieve a stun shot. Let this vertical
distance be denoted ∂. The player then draws an imaginary line from the point
(byeff(t),R), corresponding to the desired target spin state of the cue ball, to the point (0,0).
The point on that imaginary line that corresponds to (byeff(0),R-∂) is the desired contact
point. Other final spin states would be estimated in the same manner. The straight line is
always drawn from the final effective contact point to the origin (0,0), and the player
works backward in time, so to speak, from the final spin state of the cue ball to the initial
tip/ball contact time. If, during this process, the actual contact point (byeff(0),bzeff(0)) is
judged to be outside the boundary at which miscues begin to occur (see P1.7), then the
desired shot is not possible, and the player should seek other alternatives.

Problem 3.10: What is the relation between the cue stick velocity immediately before
contact, the cue ball velocity immediately after contact, and the impact parameter b?
(assume that the total kinetic energy is conserved)

                                               30
Answer: Conservation of linear momentum and kinetic energy give
       MsV 0 = MsV s + MbV b
        1 M V 2 = 1 M V 2 + 1 M V 2 + 1 I ∑2
        2 s 0      2 s s      2 b b         2   b
                                        b 2
                = 12 MsV s2 +  12 + 54    MbV b2
                                         R 
Solve the first equation for Vs, and substitute into the second equation to obtain
                     2V0
        Vb =
                            b 2
              1 + b + 52  
                  M
                  Ms       R
It may be verified that this expression agrees with that of P3.2 when b=0. It may now be
understood why it is desirable to avoid spin on the cue ball during the break shot. For a
given cue stick energy, or velocity V 0, any spin corresponding to nonzero b has the effect
of reducing the cue ball velocity and the translational kinetic energy; the maximum cue
ball speed is achieved with a centerball b=0 contact point. The ratio Vb/V0 is plotted as a
function of impact parameter for some selected ball/stick mass ratios in Fig. 3.3.

Problem 3.11: What is the vertical impact parameter that maximizes the ratio V NR/V0
where VNR is the cue ball natural roll velocity and V 0 is the before-collision cue stick
velocity?
Answer: From P2.2, P3.6, and P3.10, the natural roll velocity is given by
                                                       
                                              b
                                         1 +        
                                 ( )
        V NR = 57 Vb + 27 R b = 10
                                 7 
                                                R
                                                      2  V0
                                     1+ Mb + 5  b  
                                        Ms 2  R  
Solving for the velocity ratio, differentiating with respect to b, setting the result to zero,
and simplifying gives
        b                    7 2  Mb 
                     = −1  +     +
        R  max V             5 5  Ms 
                   NR
For a 6oz ball and an 18oz stick, the optimal impact point is given by
         b
                       = 0.238        [Ms/Mb=3]
         R  max V
                    NR
and for a 24 oz stick the optimal impact point is
         b
                       = 0.225       [Ms/Mb=4]
         R  max V
                   NR
This range includes most common stick weights and shows that the optimal impact point
is only weakly dependent on the stick weight in this range. In both cases, the impact
point is between centerball b=0 and the natural roll height b=2⁄5R. The initial cue ball
velocity is maximized at b=0, but 2⁄7 of this velocity is lost upon achieving natural roll to

                                               31
sliding friction; at b=2⁄5R there is no velocity loss due to sliding friction, but the initial
velocity is relatively small due to the energy and momentum transfer conditions between
the stick and ball. The above contact point is the optimal compromise between these two
extremes. Maximization of the natural roll velocity is the same as maximizing the natural
roll energy, and is the same as maximizing the distance that the ball rolls before stopping
due to rolling resistance. Because this distance is maximized, this also means that the
distance is relatively insensitive to small deviations of the contact point away from this
optimal value. This is most useful when cue ball placement is of utmost importance such
as, for example, during the lag shot at the beginning of a match. The ratio VNR/V0 is
plotted as a function of impact parameter for some selected ball/stick mass ratios in Fig.
3.4.

                2
                                         Mb
                                            =0
                                         Ms
                                  Mb 1
                                    =
                                  Ms 4
               1.5
                             Mb 1
                               =
                             Ms 3
          Vb              Mb
                             =1
           C

          V0    1
                          Ms

               0.5

                0
                     -1              -0.5            0         0.5             1
                                                   bB 
                                                   R

       Fig 3.3. The ratio of the cue ball velocity Vb to the before-collision cue
       stick velocity V0 is shown as a function of the vertical impact parameter
       (b/R) for some selected ball/stick mass ratios.

                                                 32
          2

                                  Mb
                                     =0
                                  Ms
         1.5

V b,NR                      Mb 1
                              =
  D

  V0                        Ms 4
          1
                        Mb 1
                          =
                        Ms 3

         0.5
                    Mb
                       =1
                    Ms

          0
               -1              -0.5          0        0.5             1
                                           bC
                                            R

Fig. 3.4. The ratio of the final natural roll cue ball velocity Vb,NR to the
before-collision cue stick velocity V0 is shown as a function of the vertical
impact parameter (b/R) for some selected ball/stick mass ratios. For a
given ball/stick mass ratio, the optimal contact point for a lag shot is
determined by the flat region near the curve maximum.

                                          33
4. Collisions Between Balls
         Consider the motions of two colliding balls. One ball is assumed to be moving
before the collision, and both balls are assumed to be moving afterwards. For this
discussion, assume that the initially moving ball is the cue ball, and the initially stationary
ball is an object ball. As the two balls collide in an off-center hit, the frictional forces
acting tangential to the surfaces are relatively small (e.g. compared to the frictional forces
between a ball and the cue tip). All of the remaining force is directed along the line
between the centers of the balls.

                                                                C

                                    Vb                                      Vc

                                              V0=Vb+Vc
                  D

                         Vc

        Fig. 4.1. Pictorial representation of the conservation of momentum vector
        relation V0=Vb+Vc. The angles C and D are supplementary and satisfy
        the relation C+D=π.

         Consider first the ball motions just before the collision and just after the collision;
in this situation, the friction between the cloth and the sliding/rolling balls has not had
time to affect the ball trajectories. Linear momentum (p=MV) is conserved in both the x-
and y-coordinate directions. Represented with vectors, the vector sum of the final
momentum of the two balls is equal to the initial momentum of the cue ball. Eliminating
the mass M of the balls, results in the vector relation V 0=Vb+Vc between the initial and
final velocities. This relation is shown pictorially in Fig. 4.1. The final velocity of the
cue ball Vc has been drawn twice: once with its base common to that of the Vb vector,
which is consistent with both balls departing from the same collision point on the table,
and again with its base at the end of the Vb vector to show pictorially that V 0=Vb+Vc.
The angles D and C are supplementary and are related by (in radians) C+D=π, and
consequently, cos(C)=-cos(D).

                                               34
         In addition to momentum, energy is also conserved in this collision to a good
approximation. The relatively small amount of energy that is lost is turned into sound or
heat within the balls. An elastic collision is one in which energy is assumed to be
conserved, so this energy loss will be denoted Einelastic. As discussed in the previous
sections, there are two kinds of kinetic energy, translational and rotational, associated
with each ball. Equating the energy before and after the collision gives
         T0(Trans) + T0(Rot) = Tc(Trans) + Tc(Rot) + Tb(Trans) + Tb(Rot) + Einelastic
Collecting all the T(Rot) terms together, and multiplying by 2/M gives the relation
         V 02 = V b2 + V c2 +∆ elastic +∆ inelastic = V b2 + V c2 +∆ total
with
         ∆ elastic =  (2
                           T
                      M c(Rot )
                                                    )
                                   + Tb( Rot) − T0( Rot)

                         2
         ∆ inelastic =      E
                        M inelastic
The term Îelastic depends on the total change of rotational energy. The contribution
Îelastic may be positive, zero, or negative, but the term Î inelastic is always positive, since
it represents an energy loss in the collision process. There are two types of contributions
to Einelastic, the first type of energy loss is due to the frictional forces of the sliding balls.
These frictional forces result in the exchange of energy between the various translational
and rotational components. Just as in the case of the simple sliding block, the frictional
forces are intimately related to the inelastic energy loss; without this inelastic energy loss,
there would be no sliding friction. As will be seen in the following discussions, this
inelastic energy loss can be determined by analysis of the resulting momentum exchange
between the balls. Other contributions to the inelastic energy loss involve the imperfect
transfer of energy between the balls. For example, the sound made by the colliding balls
represents a transfer of kinetic energy from the collision process to the surroundings.
This energy loss would occur even in the absence of sliding frictional forces. In the
present discussion, this latter type of energy loss will not be considered quantitatively in
the analysis. With this simplification, both the elastic and inelastic contributions to Îtotal
are assumed to be associated with the tangential forces of sliding friction.
         The law of cosines for an arbitrary triangle with sides a, b, and c with
corresponding angles A, B, and C is
         c2 = a2 + b2 -2ab cos(C)
This allows the angles of a triangle to be related to the lengths of the three sides. In
particular, the sides of the triangle resulting from the pictorial representation of the
conservation of momentum relation may be related to the departure angle. Comparing
the law of cosines with the above velocity equation gives the relation
                      −∆ total
         cos(C) =               = –cos(D)
                     2 V b Vc

                                               35
between the angles C and D and the change of translational energy term Î total. If there is
no translational kinetic energy loss during the collision of the balls, then Îtotal=0,
cos(C)=0, and C=π⁄2 is a right angle (i.e. 90 degrees). In this case, the law of cosines
reduces to the familiar theorem of Pythagoras. If C=π⁄2, then D=π⁄2 and the two balls
depart at exactly a right angle. In this initial discussion it will be assumed that the balls
are rotating about the vertical axes only; the more general situation is examined later. If
there is no rotational energy change during the collision, then Îelastic=0. There are three
situations in which there will be no total rotational energy change during a collision.
First, if there is no friction between the balls, then there will be no tangential forces acting
at the point of contact. This is, of course, an approximation, but for many shots such an
approximation is sufficient, and in any case it defines a convenient reference point. The
second situation in which no spin change occurs is when the cue ball has just the right
amount of outside spin so that the ball surfaces are not moving relative to each other
during the (very short) collision time. In this case the cue ball spin is unchanged, and the
object ball acquires no spin during the collision. The third situation in which no total
rotational energy change occurs is when the cue ball has just the right amount of inside
spin so that all of the cue ball spin is transferred to the object ball, and the cue ball departs
with no spin. The first situation is an ideal, and occurs only with no friction between the
colliding balls; Îtotal=0 in this case for all collision situations. The second situation is
independent of the ball friction, but depends on matching exactly the outside spin and the
cut angle; Îtotal=0 for this situation since both components vanish when there is no
friction. The third situation depends on matching the amount of inside spin with the
friction between the balls and the cut angle; since there are accelerations associated with
the frictional forces, there is a nonzero Îinelastic component, Îtotal≠0, and therefore the
departure angle will differ from π⁄2.
         To appreciate the importance of spin transfer, consider a cut shot, with ball
friction, when the cue ball has no spin initially. In this case, the T0(Rot) term will be zero,
but both Tc(Rot) and Tb(Rot) will be nonzero. The cue ball acquires some sidespin by
rubbing against the object ball, and the initially motionless object ball acquires some
sidespin by rubbing against the cue ball. In this case, both Î elastic>0 and Îinelastic>0, the
angle C will be larger than π⁄2, and the angle of departure D will be smaller than a right
angle. In actual practice this is a small effect, in the neighborhood of 2-4 degrees
depending on how sticky are the pair of colliding balls, but a 4 degree angle, over 8 feet
results in a deviation of 6.7", or about half a diamond on a 9' table (tan(å)=d/L with
deviation angle å, distance L, and deviation distance d). When referring to the resulting
object ball deviations, this effect is called collision-induced throw, and clearly this must
be accounted for, to some extent, on any but the most trivial of shots.

Problem 4.1: What are the conditions in which Î elastic will be positive, zero, and
negative? (assume all spins are about the vertical axes)

                                               36
Answer: Substituting the rotational energy expression gives
       ∆ elastic = 25 R 2   ( c2 + b2 − 20 )
where all angular velocities are relative to the vertical axes of each ball. However, any
change of angular velocity in the cue ball must be compensated exactly by a
corresponding change in the object ball angular velocity, since the frictional forces on
each ball are equal but opposite in direction.
          0 = c− b .
Substitution of this relation gives
        ∆ elastic = 45 R 2 b c .
When the final spins of both balls are in the same direction (i.e. both are clockwise when
looking down on the table from above, or both are counterclockwise), then Îelastic will be
positive, cos(D) will be positive, and the angle of departure of the two balls will be <π⁄2.
When the final spin of either the cue ball or the object ball is zero, then Î elastic will be
zero, and the departure angle will be ≤π⁄2, and the magnitude will depend entirely on
Îinelastic which is always nonnegative. These are the only situations that result in
Îelastic=0. When the final spins of the two balls are in opposite directions (i.e. one
clockwise and the other counterclockwise), then Î elastic will be negative, and the
departure angle will depend on the relative magnitudes of the two components Î elastic
and Îinelastic. Note that cos(D) depends on the final spin/speed ratios of the balls, so
within the current set of simplifying approximations, the contribution of Îelastic to the
departure angle is independent of the overall shot speed.

         The above qualitative analysis did not require a detailed examination of the forces
during the collision process. These forces and the resulting ball trajectories are now
examined in more detail. For this pupose, it is useful to define two coordinate systems as
shown in Fig. 4.2. The first coordinate system, denoted (x',y',z'), is appropriate for the
initial cue ball velocity before the collision; the second, denoted (x,y,z) is the natural
coordinate system to describe the trajectories after the collision. Unit vectors along these
two coordinate axes satisfy the transformation relation
          ˆi ′   cos( ) sin( ) 0  ˆi 
          ˆj′  =  − sin( ) cos( ) 0  ˆj 
         ˆ                            
          
           k  ′         0       0    1   kˆ 

                                               37
                                                  Vc=(V0sin(å)-Vby)        ĵ

                                                        ĵ
                                                                                Vb
                                                             î
                                                                                       Vby

                                                                        Vbx=V0cos(å)

                                   V0
               ˆj     ˆi
                  ′      ′
                         å

        Fig. 4.2. The effects of the sliding frictional forces on the object ball and
        cue ball are shown in detail on the after-collision velocity vectors. Two
        coordinate systems are used in the analysis of object ball throw. The first
        is relative to the initial cue ball velocity V0, the second is appropriate to
        describe the after-collision velocities. The vertical z-coordinate is not
        shown, but is directed out of the plane of the figure. The angle å would be
        the object ball cut angle if there were no friction.

It is convenient to take the origin of the (x,y,z) coordinate system to be the cue ball center
at the moment of contact with the object ball. With this choice, the contact point of the
cue ball and object ball lies on the x-axis. In the absense of friction, the object ball would
depart along the x-axis and the cue ball would depart along the y-axis. The frictional
forces are tangential to the point of contact, and therefore lie in the yz plane. The
direction of the frictional force is determined by the velocity of the contact point of the
cue ball at the moment of contact. The contact point velocity is the sum of the linear
velocity
                             (                )
         V0 = V 0ˆi ′ = V 0 cos( )ˆi + sin( )ˆj
and the angular velocity
                                   ˆi    ˆj        kˆ
        ∑0 × r cp = R ∑ 0 × ˆi =   0x    0y        0z = R         ( 0zˆj − 0ykˆ )
                                   R     0         0
If the cue ball is struck with a level cue stick (i.e. no masse), then the cue ball rotation
may be written as

                                                  38
       ∑0 = ′0y ˆj′ + 0z         ′ sin( )ˆi + 0y
                      ′ kˆ ′ = − 0y            ′ cos( )ˆj + 0zkˆ
  ′ <0 for backspin, 0y
  0y                  ′ =0 for a stun shot, and 0y
                                                 ′ >0 for topspin.               ′ =
                                                                                 0z    0z
corresponds to sidespin. The resulting contact point velocity is
       Vcp = V 0 cos( )ˆi + (V 0 sin( ) + R 0z )ˆj − R ′0y cos( )kˆ

             = V cpx ˆi + V cpyˆj + V cpz kˆ
It is the sign of Vcpy that determines the direction of throw of the object ball. Vcpy >0
results in throwing the object ball in the + ˆj direction, Vcpy <0 results in - ˆj throw, and
Vcpy =0 results in no throw. It is interesting that, for a given angle å, Vcpy depends only
on the cue ball sidespin ∑0z. Cue ball topspin or draw does not change the direction of
throw, but it does change the magnitude of the throw.
         The Vcpx component of the contact point velocity is directed exactly along the
object ball center of mass. As the balls collide, the momentum component p x=MVcpx is
transferred entirely from the cue ball to the object ball. This momentum is transferred
                                                                             t
during the very short collision time t according to the equation pbx = ∫ F x ( t ′)dt ′ . If
                                                                            0
there are any tangential components of the contact point velocity, then at any time during
the collision there is a tangential frictional force with magnitude given by
 F⊥ (t ) = bb Fx (t ) where µbb is the ball-ball sliding coefficient of friction. The direction
of this tangential force is determined by the tangential components of the contact point
velocity. A unit vector in this tangential direction may be defined as
                 Vcp⊥     Vcpy ˆj − Vcpz kˆ
          eˆ ⊥ =       =
                 Vcp⊥     V ˆj − V kˆ
                            cpy       cpz

                  (V 0 sin( ) + R 0z )ˆj − R 0y
                                             ′ cos( )kˆ
            =                                               1
                 V sin
                                               (        )
                                                    2 2
                 (
                 0    ( ) + R 0z ) 2
                                      + R ′
                                          0y cos( )  
            = cos( )ˆj + sin( )kˆ
with obvious definitions for the horizontal component cos(©) and vertical component
sin(©). The vertical component of this force direction sin(©) either works in conjuction or
opposition to the weight of the ball; it does not affect the direction of the cue ball or
object ball velocities in the plane of the table after the collision. However, the horizontal
component of the force cos(©) does affect the object ball direction. It is this horizontal
component of the force that results in the object ball throw. Fig. 4.3 shows the possible
combinations of directions for the unit vector eˆ ⊥ and the geometrical meaning of the
components cos(©) and sin(©). The factor cos(©) may be thought of as a geometrical
efficiency factor in converting the frictional forces into throw velocities.

                                                   39
                                          z
                         Vcpy > 0             Vcpy < 0

                                         k̂                           Draw
                                 ê ⊥                                  ′ <0
                                                                       0y
         y                        ©

                            ĵ
                                                                      Topspin
                                                                       ′ >0
                                                                       0y

       Fig. 4.3. The unit vector eˆ ⊥ , parallel to the direction of the sliding
       frictional force on the object ball, is decomposed into the horizontal and
       vertical components characterized by the angle ©. This force is applied to
       the object ball at the contact point, and an opposing force is applied to the
       cue ball. This force is tangential to the ball surfaces and lies in the yz-
       plane. The direction of the unit vector depends on the cut angle and the
       spin axis of the cue ball at the moment of the collision. The object ball
       throw is proportional to the horizontal component of the frictional force.

       The object ball throw is determined by the y-component of the frictional force.
Substitution of the above decomposition of eˆ ⊥ gives the relations
                t                             t
        pby = ∫ F⊥y (t ′ )dt ′ = cos( ) bb ∫ Fx ( t ′)dt ′ = cos( ) bb pbx
               0                              0
       V by = cos( ) bbV bx
The horizontal component of the tangential frictional force results in the throw velocity
Vby being added to the object ball velocity, and the opposing frictional force acts to
subtract exactly this velocity from the post-collision cue ball velocity. Because the factor
cos(©) depends on several parameters, it is useful to consider some special cases.

Problem 4.2: How does the throw angle ε defined by tan(ε)=V by/Vbx, depend on overall
shot speed?
Answer: Rewriting the cos(©) expression in terms of spin/speed ratios gives

                                                  40
        cos( ) =
                             (sin( ) +    R 0z
                                           V0    )            1

                  (sin( ) +     )
                             R 0z 2     R 0′ y        2        2

                                   +      V0 cos(    ) 
                              V0                         
The geometrical factor cos(©) is seen to depend entirely on spin/speed ratios, not overall
shot speed. The throw angle is ε=arctan(V by/Vbx)=arctan(µ bbcos(©)). The velocity ratio,
and therefore the throw angle ε is independent of the shot speed. In practice, this result is
not entirely true; the throw angle decreases slightly for very hard shots. This change of
throw angle with shot speed is due to a slight speed-dependence of µbb. Fig. 4.4 shows
the dependence of the object ball throw factor cos(©) as a function of the sidespin/speed
ratio (R∑0z/V0) for a specific cut angle of π/6 (a half-ball cut) for several values of the
topspin/speed ratio.

Problem 4.3: For a stun shot,      ′ =0, how does the throw velocity depend on the cue
                                   0y
ball cut angle å?
Answer: For a stun shot, the cos(©) factor reduces to the form
                  V cpy (V 0 sin( ) + R 0z )
        cos( ) =        =                      = ±1             ′ =0]
                                                           [for 0y
                  V cpy    V 0 sin( ) + R 0z
The sign of the cos(©) factor is determined by the initial velocity component, the cut angle
å, and the sidespin ∑0z. The throw velocity is then given by
        Vby = ±µbb Vbx
If the cue ball has no sidespin, then cos(©)=+1, and Vby = µbbVbx for the shot angle in Fig.
4.2. This result was assumed in P1.6, as a way to determine µbb, but it is now seen with a
careful analysis that this assumption was indeed correct [provided the frozen object ball
acts the same as a stun-shot collision]. The only dependence of the throw velocity on the
cut angle is in the direction of the frictional force. Fig. 4.4 shows the dependence of the
object ball throw factor cos(©) as a function of the sidespin/speed ratio (R∑0z/V0) for a
stun shot. There is an abrubt change in value as V cpy changes sign.

                                            ′ =V0 (or a reverse natural roll cue ball,
Problem 4.4: For a natural roll cue ball, R 0y
   ′ =–V0) how does the throw angle depend on the cue ball cut angle å?
R 0y
Answer: For a natural roll cue ball, the cos(©) factor reduces to the form
                          
                           sin( ) + R 0z 
                                       V0 
      cos( ) =                                       1      [NR or RNR]
                                    2               2
                              R 0z 
                  sin ( ) +            + cos( )2 
                              V0                
In Fig. 4.4, this factor is plotted as a function of sidespin/speed ratio for a specific cut

                                                 41
angle å=π/6. The throw angle is determined by ε=arctan(µbbcos(©)). Although the slope
is steepest in the region near V cpy=0, the slope is not as steep in this region as that for
smaller values of |R 0y ′ /V0|.

                                             Object Ball Throw Factor
                       1.5

                         1

                       0.5
                                                                           R 0′ y 
                                                                                   = 2 [Overspin]
                                                                           V0 
              cos(©)     0
                                                                            R 0′ y 
                                                                                    = 1 [NR]
                                                                            V0 
                       -0.5
                                                                           R 0′ y 
                                                                                     = 0.05
                                                                            V0 
                        -1                                                 R 0′ y 
                                                                                   = 0 [Stun]
                                                                           V0 

                       -1.5
                              -4   -3   -2       -1       0           1          2             3      4
                                                        R /V
                                                        0z 0 z 0
                                                       R∑
                                                        V0 

       Fig. 4.4. The object ball throw factor cos(©) is shown as a function of the
       cue ball sidespin to speed ratio (R∑0z/V0) for selected values of of cue ball
       topspin/draw. The slope of the given curve determines how sensitive is
       the object ball throw to small variations in the sidespin.

      In practice, it is impossible to achieve an exact stun shot. There will always be
some small value of 0y  ′ . Similarly, the quantity Vcpy=(V0sin(å)+R∑0z) will never be
exactly zero; it may be very small, but it will never be exactly zero. This leads to the
question of how the throw angle depends on small variations from these limiting
conditions. The answer is that the direction of the unit vector eˆ ⊥ becomes very sensitive,
rotating wildly even with very small changes in the cue ball spin. Both the numerator and
the denominator of the components become small, but without a definite limit.
Therefore, the cos(©) factor can vary between –1 and +1, and the throw velocity can vary
anywhere between –µbbVbx. and +µ bbVbx. For small values of 0y      ′ , the slope of the
cos(©) curve becomes very steep; this steepness reflects the sensitivity of the object ball
throw to the sidespin. This correlation of steepness of slope with small 0y  ′ values may
be seen in Fig. 4.4. This slope reflects the sensitivity of the throw factor cos(©) with
respect to changes in the sidespin. The sensitivity of the throw factor with respect to

                                                  42
changes in the topspin is related to the derivative of cos(©) with respect to the other
                     ′ /V0).
spin/speed ratio (R 0y

Problem 4.5: What is the sensitivity of the object ball throw with respect to both
components of the cue ball spin?
Answer: It is conventient to characterize the sensitivity in terms of the spin/speed ratios
J0z=(R∑0z/V0) and J0y=(R∑'0y/V0). The sensitivity of the throw factor to the cue ball spin
is characterized by the derivatives
        d cos( )         − (sin( ) + J 0z ) J0y cos2 ( )
                  =                                       3
                    
                                        (             )
          dJ0y                                          2 2
                     (sin( ) + J 0z ) + J0y cos( ) 
                                      2

        d cos( )
                 =
                               (J 0y cos( )  )2
                                                     3
                   
                                        (             )
          dJ0z                                    2 2
                    (sin( ) + J 0z ) + J0y cos( ) 
                                     2

The first equation gives the sensitivity of the throw with respect to changes in the topspin
or backspin of the cue ball, the second equation gives the sensitivity with respect to
changes in the sidespin. When J0y is small, then the slope of the cos(©) factor is
approximately
        d cos( )
                 ≈
                    (
                    J 0y cos( )    )2       [for smallJ0y]
                                3
          dJ0z     sin( ) + J0z
This shows why the slope of the cos(©) curve becomes essentially vertical in Fig. 4.4 as
the sidespin J0z passes through the zero point of Vcpy and the denominator of this
component of the sensitivity vanishes.

      A combined measure of the sensitivity of the object ball throw to the cue ball spin
may be defined as
                   d cos( )  2  d cos( )  2
        F( J0 ) =            +           
                     dJ 0y      dJ0z 
For values of J0 that correspond to small F(J0), the player is allowed larger margins of
error in shot execution (e.g. in the accuracy of the cue tip contact point) and in judgement
(e.g. in estimating, and compensating for, the object ball throw). Regions with large
F(J0) are those where very small spin variations result in large changes in the object ball
throw; these are the regions that the player should try to avoid. Fig. 4.5 shows a contour
plot of the sensitivity F as a function of the two components of the cue ball spin, J 0z and
J0y, for the same cut angle as was used in Fig. 4.4, namely å=π/6 (a half-ball cut). It may
be observed that the regions of least sensitivity are those with small J 0y (i.e. close to
being a stun shot), and large sidespin |J0z | (i.e. corresponding to extreme underspin or

                                               43
overspin). Regions of high sensitivity are seen to correspond to V cpy=0 (i.e. to
J0z=-sin(å)=- 1⁄2). The highest sensitivity contours correspond to the region near the point
Vcpy=0 and J0y=0; a magnified view of this region is shown in the inset in Fig. 4.5. The
sensitivity of the throw angle becomes enormous in this region. Ironically, the spin
combinations that result in the smallest object ball throw sometimes correspond also to
the largest sensitivity, and the spin combinations that result in the largest throw
sometimes correspond also to the smallest sensitivity.
         With this sensitivity in mind, it is possibly a wise tactic to avoid these conditions
so as to avoid the large uncertainty in the throw angle. That is, stun shots with outside
spin should be avoided, according to this argument, when the effects of throw might be
critical to the success of the shot. This uncertainty may be avoided in practice by
ensuring that the numerator or the denominator (or both) are significantly different from
zero at the moment of collision of the cue ball with the object ball. This may be done for
a given shot either by avoiding stun-shot spin (i.e. ensuring 0y   ′ ≠0 thereby reducing the
magnitude of the cos(©) factor), or by avoiding the Vcpy=0 condition (thereby producing a
predictable, although nonzero throw), or by avoiding both simultaneously.
        It should be pointed out that this recommendation is somewhat contrary to that
given by some other players, teachers, and authors. Their argument is that minimizing
                                                                                     ′ |
the Vcpy factor will minimize the throw. As seen in Fig. 4.5, this is only true if | 0y
differs from zero and is large compared to |Vcpy|. In practice for some types of shots, it
may be easier to avoid the Vcpy=0 combinations of speed and sidespin by intentionally
overspinning or underspinning the cue ball, and to account explicitly for the throw by
adjusting the aim point. This approach might be preferable in situations where stun-shot
spin is necessary for position. Examples of this compensation are described in the
following problems. Another complicating factor is the seemingly random phenomenon
called skid (also called cling or kick). Skid occurs when a small piece of chalk or dust is
trapped between the contact point of the balls, increasing dramatically the coefficient of
friction for that particular shot. When this occurs, the amount of throw associated with
nonzero Vcpy is very unpredictable.

Problem 4.6: For a natural roll cue ball (or reverse natural roll cue ball) with no
sidespin, ∑0z=0, how does the throw angle depend on the cue ball cut angle å?
Answer: From P4.4, the cos(©) factor reduces to the form
                        (sin( ))
        cos( ) =                     1 = sin( )        [NR or RNR with ∑0z=0]
                 (sin( ) + cos( )
                         2        2
                                     )2

The throw angle is determined by ε=arctan(µbbcos(©))=arctan(µbbsin(å)). The throw
depends only on the cut angle å. It is 0 for a straight in shot (å=0), and increases to a
maximum value for very thin cuts (å≈π/2). The impact parameter for the cue ball/object

                                             44
ball collision is bbb=Rsin(å). This allows the factor cos(©)=bbb/R to be easily determined
geometrically for any given cut shot with natural roll and no sidespin.

                            Object Ball Throw Sensitivity

       Fig. 4.5. A contour plot of the sensitivity of the object ball throw factor
       cos(©) is shown as a function of the cue ball sidespin to speed ratios
       J0z=(R∑0z/V0) and the topspin-draw spin to speed ratio J0y=(R∑'0y/V0).
       Adjacent contours differ by a factor of two in the sensitivity function
       F(J0). The inset figure is an expanded view of the small region near J0y=0
       and Vcpy=0.

        Based on these considerations, the following procedure may be used to adjust for
object ball throw for natural roll shots with no sidespin. (1) Determine µbb using the
procedure in P1.6. This only needs to be done once for a given set of balls. (2) For the
particular shot of interest, estimate the distance D from the object ball to the pocket; the
corresponding maximum throw distance will be µbbD. (3) For the zero-friction cut angle

                                             45
for the particular shot of interest, estimate the impact parameter for the ball-ball collision,
and the ratio bbb/R. (4) Multiply the maximum throw distance µbbD by the impact
parameter ratio bbb/R, and call the result s. (5) Imagine a point that is displaced by the
distance s from the pocket target, and aim for this offset point as if there were no throw.
        For an example of this procedure, assume that µbb has been determined for the set
of balls as in P1.6 to be 4/72. For the shot of interest, the distance from the object ball to
the pocket is 36". The maximum throw distance for this shot is (4/72)*36"=2"; that is,
half the reference shot distance results in half the maximum throw distance. Suppose that
the shot of interest is almost straight-in, a slight cut to the left, with bbb/R=1⁄4. The offset
distance is given by s=1⁄4*2"=1⁄2". Now a displaced point 1⁄2" to the left of the pocket
center is used as a corrected aim point. This aim point is valid for either natural roll or
reverse natural roll. With a little bit of practice, these estimations become second nature
and may be done almost instantaneously. For other 0y        ′ spin combinations, the offset
point will be displaced from the target pocket somewhere between the maximum value of
2" (appropriate for a stun shot) and the natural roll value of 1⁄2", but the offset aim point
will always be on the “overcut” side of the pocket center. Experienced pool players know
to “cut ‘em thin to win” when the balls are sticky, and the above procedure quantifies just
“how thin” is “thin” to achieve the most consistent results.
         The use of sidespin also requires further adjustments to the above procedure, but
this requires even more judgement on the part of the shooter. One way to adjust for
sidespin is to estimate mentally the cos(©) factor by imagining how the cue ball will be
spinning at the time of contact. Replacing the cue ball with a striped ball, and practicing
various combinations of topspin, draw, stun, and sidespin will help the player develop
this estimation skill. In general, the offset point will always be displaced less than the
maximum value determined by µbbD. Of course, small µbb values mean that any errors
made in the estimation of the cos(©) factor result in smaller errors in the object ball
trajectory. Sticky balls with large µbb are very challenging. One of the challenges faced
by tournament players is the accurate adjustment to different sets of balls, each with
different µbb, as they move from table to table in the tournament matches.

Problem 4.7: What is the resulting object ball spin ∑ b due to the frictional force F⊥ (t)?
Answer: The angular acceleration is given by the equation r × F = I ∑˙ . Integration of the
force over the contact time gives
              −R t ˆ                    − R bb ˆ
                                                   (                 )
                                                                        t
        ∑b =      ∫ i × F ⊥ (t ′)dt ′ =        i × cos( )ˆj + sin( )kˆ ∫ F x (t ′)dt ′
               I 0                         I                            0

            =
              −5 bb Vbx
                 2R
                          (                    )
                           −sin ( ) ˆj + cos( )kˆ

Problem 4.8: What is the relation between the natural roll spin axis and the object ball
throw angle? (For simplicity, ignore the effects of the vertical friction components during

                                               46
the cue ball and object ball collision.)
Answer: Since both the object ball sidespin and the object ball throw angle are caused by
the same frictional force, the magnitudes of these two effects are closely related.
Immediately after the collision with the cue ball (and ignoring the object ball spin due to
the vertical friction components), the object ball linear velocity and angular velocity
vectors are given by
        Vb = Vbx ˆi + Vby ˆj = Vbx ˆi + bb cos( )V bx ˆj = Vb ˆeb
                        5   cos( )Vbx  ˆ
        ∑b = ∑bz kˆ = −  bb             k
                             2R       
with tan(ε)=µbbcos(©). After achieving natural roll, the object ball linear and angular
velocity vectors are
        VbNR = 57 Vb ˆeb
                      5Vb ˆ
        ∑bNR = ∑b +         e
                        2R b⊥
where the unit vector eˆ b⊥ = kˆ × ˆeb is the horizontal vector perpendicular to the object
ball velocity. The angle of the natural roll spin axis is related to the components of the
spin axes according to
                           5Vby             7tan ( )       7
        tan( ) = z = −             =−                  = − sin ( )
                   z      2VbNR         2 1+ tan ( )
                                                   2       2
For the typically small object ball throw angles, the approximate relations
          ≈ − 72 ≈ − 72 bb cos( )                   [for small ε]
show that the natural roll spin axis tilt angle is about 31⁄2 times larger in magnitude than
the corresponding object ball throw angle, and that both angles are approximately linear
with respect to the ball-ball friction coefficient. This axis tilt is most easily observed by
viewing the rolling object ball from directly behind its path and by noting the equivalent
tilt of the stationary rotational equator. The relation between the spin axis and the
rotational equator is shown in Fig. 4.6. This axis tilt may be used to give the player
additional feedback in adjusting the compensation for object ball throw on cut shots.

        P4.7 gives the resulting object ball spin if the frictional force acts on the ball
without opposition. During the collision, in order for a horizontal component of angular
acceleration to occur, the ball-ball friction must act simultaneously with the ball-cloth
friction. It will be assumed hereafter that the ball-cloth friction is insignificant during the
collision time, and its affects will be ignored. The practical accuracy of this
approximation may be estimated by the following considerations. A typical collision
time is t=0.0001s, and a typical object ball velocity is Vbx=100in/s. The average impact
force is then given by Favg=MVbx/t. The sliding frictional force of the ball on the cloth is
given by Fs=µsMg. The ratio is given by F s/Favg=µsgt/Vbx. Assuming a ball-cloth

                                              47
                                                               Fig. 4.6. The relation
                                                               between the tilt of the spin
                                                               axis ∑ and the rotational
                                                               equator       is       shown
                                                               pictorially as viewed from
                                                               the rear of a naturally
                                                               rolling ball. For an object
                                                               ball, the angle ∫ of the tilt
                                                               of      this      axis     is
                                                               approximately 7⁄2 times
                                                               larger in magnitude than
                                                               the object ball throw angle.

sliding coefficient of friction µs=0.1, this ratio is Fs/Favg=0.0000386. Therefore, the ball-
ball frictional forces do indeed dominate the ball-cloth frictional forces during the
collision.
         The treatment of the vertical acceleration due to the vertical component of the
frictional force is somewhat complicated. The table surface prevents any vertical
acceleration in the downward direction. The weight of the ball opposes any upward
frictional force, but it doesn’t prevent upward acceleration. Therefore, during the contact
period, if the ball is on the table surface and (F⊥z–Mg) is negative, resulting in a
downward net force, there is no acceleration at that instant. But if (F ⊥z–Mg) is positive,
then that upward force results in vertical acceleration of the ball off the table surface. If
Mg is neglible compared to a large positive F⊥z then the maximum vertical velocity
immediately after the collision would be the same as the maximum throw velocity; the
maximum angle that the object ball departs from the table surface would be the same as
the maximum horizontal object ball throw angle. With the average impact force given by
Favg=MVbx/t and the downward force of gravity given by Fgrav=Mg, then the ratio is
given by Fgrav/Favg=gt/Vbx. For the typical shot considered in the previous paragraph,
the numerical value of this ratio is Fgrav/Favg=0.000386. Therefore, the ball-ball
frictional forces also dominate the gravitational forces during the collision.

Problem 4.9: A cue ball with backspin strikes an object ball straight on. Assume the
gravitational force on the ball is negligible during the collision, a shot speed of 36"/s, and
µbb=4/72 as in P1.6. What height does the object ball achieve over the table, and how far
away from the starting point does it land?
Answer: The vertical velocity is given by
        Vbz = µbbsin(©) Vbx
For a straight on shot with backspin, sin(©)=+1 and the entire frictional force is directed

                                              48
upward. Vbz =(4/72)36"/s=2"/s. The height of the ball trajectory above the table is given
by
         z = Vbz t - 1⁄2gt2 = (2"/s)t - 1⁄2(386"/s2)t2
The maximum height is achieved when dz/dt=0. This occurs at tmax =Vbz/g=µ bbVbx /g.
The time to achieve maximum height is linear in the coefficient of friction µbb and in the
shot speed Vbx .
         tmax =Vbz/g = 2/386 s = 0.00518 s
The height achieved at this time is
                                            V2       2 V2
         zmax= Vbz tmax - 1⁄2gtmax 2 = bz = bb bx
                                             2g       2g
             = (2/386)" = 0.00518"
The maximum height achieved is proportional to the square of the coefficient of friction
and to the square of the shot speed. The ball returns to the table at the time (2tmax ). At
this time, the horizontal distance traveled by the ball while airborne is
                                      2
                              2 bbV bx
         x = Vbx (2tmax ) =
                                  g
           = 36"(2)(2/386) = 0.373"
The horizontal distance of the jump is proportional to the coefficient of friction and to the
square of the shot speed. Due to the very short times and small distances that the object
ball is airborne, this jumping effect can be neglected, for the most part, during play.

         One point to notice in P4.9 is that while the object ball has a vertical momentum
immediately after the collision, the cue ball is constrained to the table surface. If the cue
ball strikes the object ball with topspin, then it is the cue ball that leaves the table and the
object ball that is constrained to the table surface. In either case, the vertical component
of the linear momentum is not conserved by the balls during the collision. The reaction
of the downward-directed ball is absorbed by the table. If the table had been considered
to be part of the system, then linear momentum would have been conserved in the
analysis. In this respect, the nonconservation of linear momentum in the vertical
direction is an artifact of the formal separation between the “system” and the
“surroundings” in this simple analysis.

Problem 4.10: Using the velocity and spin results from P4.2-P4.7, compute the total
kinetic energy before and after the collision. Determine Einelastic. (For simplicity, ignore
the velocity and spin resulting from the vertical components of the frictional force.)
Answer: The total kinetic energy immediately before the collision is
        T0 = T0(Trans) + T0(Rot) = 12 MV 02 + 12 I 20
The kinetic energy immediately after the collision is
                  (          )
        T f = 12 M Vc2 + V 2b + 12 I   ( c2 + b2 )
                                                     49
Writing all of the friction-dependent contributions in terms of Vby gives
       V by = bb cos( )V bx = bb cos( )V 0 cos( )
       V = V cos( )ˆi + V ˆj
          b         0               by

                (
        Vc = V 0 sin( ) − V by ˆj    )
                −5Vby ˆ
        ∑b =          k
                 2R
                                                              5V by  ˆ
        ∑c = ∑0 + ∑b = − 0y                ′ cos( )ˆj +  0z −
                              ′ sin( )ˆi + 0y                          k
                                                               2R 
Substitution into the kinetic energy expression gives
                       (
        T f = T0 + M −V by (V 0 sin( ) + R 0z ) + 72 Vby
                                                      2
                                                               )
              = T0 + M (−V byV cpy + 72 V by
                                          2
                                             )
The kinetic energy change Einelastic is given by
                                         (
       Einelastic = T0 − T f = M Vby (V 0 sin( ) + R 0z ) − 72 V by
                                                                 2
                                                                      )
                            (
                        = M V by Vcpy − 72 V by
                                             2
                                                  )
The friction allows for transfer of energy between the translational and rotational degrees
of freedom, but only at a cost. This is consistent with the effect of ball-cloth friction on
the kinetic energy as discussed previously. In the expressions above, Vcpy is the
horizontal tangential component of the contact point velocity of the cue ball at the instant
of collision. Vcpy determines the direction of the frictional force on the object ball and
therefore has the same sign as Vby. The lowest order term in µbb in the loss of energy due
to friction, MVbyVcpy, is positive. The second term, which is second order in µbb and
therefore in general much smaller in magnitude, is always negative.

Problem 4.11: Determine Îelastic , Îinelastic, and Îtotal in terms of Vby. What are these
quantities when Vcpy =0?
Answer: From P4.10, Îinelastic is given by
                                                    2
        ∆ inelastic = M
                      2 E
                         inelastic = 2Vby Vcpy − 7V by
Generalizing the approach of P4.1 for arbitrary cue ball spin ∑ 0,
                                (             )            (
       ∆ elastic = 25 R 2 c2 + b2 − 20 = 25 R 2 c2 + b2 − ( ∑ c − ∑ b ) ⋅ (∑ c − ∑ b )   )
                    = 45 R 2 ∑ c ⋅ ∑ b

                    = − 2R 0zV by + 5V by
                                       2

                                                                 2
        ∆ total = ∆ elastic + ∆ inelastic = 2V by V0 sin( ) − 2V by
In general Îtotal is a quadratic function of the ball-ball sliding coefficient of friction µbb.

                                                      50
In the special case of Vcpy =0, then also Vby=0 and Îtotal vanishes, indicating that the
departure angle of the cue ball and object ball is exactly a right angle.

      The initial velocity of the cue ball immediately after collision is given by
      (                     )
Vc = V 0 sin( ) − V by ˆj . The magnitude of this velocity depends on the object ball
throw, but its direction is independent of any frictional forces. If the cue ball has no spin
about the horizontal axis (i.e. only sidespin, no backspin or topspin), then this initial
direction is unchanged by the sliding friction of the cloth. The cue ball will slow down
upon achieving natural roll, but the velocity direction will remain unchanged. In this
sense, the trajectory of the cue ball after the collision is less dependent on the ball-ball
coefficient of friction µbb than the object ball trajectory. This observation is useful in
judging and executing accurate stun shot caroms.

Exercise 4.1: Experiment with stun shot caroms. Begin by placing the cue ball a few
inches away from the object ball, and cueing exactly in the center. The cue ball should
not curve after the collision. Mark the position of the cue ball center at the collision point
and the two contact points where the balls touch the cushions. Measure the angle and
determine how close is the departure angle to a right angle. Include shots with sidespin to
determine the effects of Îtotal on the departure angle. With some practice, stun shot
caroms can be executed very accurately. Stun shot caroms are particularly useful in
9-ball.

Problem 4.12: Determine the total angular momentum immediately before and after the
collision relative to the point that corresponds to the cue ball center at the moment of
collision. Is angular momentum conserved? (ignore the linear velocity components due
to the vertical frictional forces)
Answer: There are two contributions to the total angular momentum. One is the
rotational contributions of the balls spinning about their centers, Lspin = I ∑ , and the
other is the orbital contribution of the centers of mass moving about the point of origin,
Lorbit = r × p . Before the collision, these contributions are
          Lorbit
           0     = r0 (t) × p0 (t) = (V0t ) × ( MV0 ) = 0
          Lspin
            0 = I ∑0
          L 0 = Lorbit
                 0     + Lspin
                          0    = I ∑0
After the collision the contributions are
        Lorbit
          b                          (          )
               = rb (t) × pb (t) = 2Rˆi + Vb t × ( MVb )

                        (        )        ( (               ))
                 = 2MR ˆi × Vb = 2MR ˆi × V bx ˆi + Vby ˆj = 2MRVby kˆ

                 = −2I bz kˆ

                                                    51
        Lspin
          b = I ∑b
        Lorbit
         c     = rc (t) × pc (t) = ( Vbt ) × ( MVb ) = 0

          c = I ∑ c = I (∑ 0 + ∑ b )
        Lspin
        L = Lorbit + Lspin  orbit
             c         c + Lb     + Lspin              ˆ
                                      b = I ∑ 0 +2I by j
The total angular momentum difference before and after the collision is then
        L − L0 = 2I by ˆj
The total angular momentum is always conserved except for the horizontal component
about the y-axis, which is conserved only when ∑by=0. This component arises from the
                                                                       ′ =0 (i.e. for stun
vertical frictional force during the collision, and vanishes only when 0y
shot collisions). The vertical component of angular momentum is always conserved, as is
the other horizontal component about the x-axis; the orbital angular momentum arising
from the object ball throw compensates exactly for the change in the spin angular
momentum. This compensation cannot occur for the vertical frictional force because of
the constraint of the table surface. In the above equations, the vertical linear acceleration
was neglected, but even if it had been included for the jumped ball (as determined in
P4.9), the corresponding contribution from the nonjumped ball during the collision is
eliminated by the table surface. Indeed, as discussed previously, because the vertical
components of linear momentum are not conserved in the collision, it should not be
expected that the angular momentum components due to these same frictional forces
could be conserved using the same simple analysis.

        In the previous few problems, various aspects of object ball throw have been
examined. The object ball throw affects the trajectories of the balls immediately after the
collision. The behavior of the balls after the collision is determined by both the initial
post-collision conditions of the balls and by the action of the cloth friction on the sliding
balls which was discussed in some detail in the previous sections. The results of the
present section heretofore, involving ball-ball interaction will now be combined with the
results of the previous sections to examine the behavior of the sliding balls as a function
of the collision conditions, and eventually, as a function of the tip-ball contact point. In
the following discussions, object ball throw will be largely ignored in order to simplify
the derivations. In most cases, the effects of object ball throw may be included, at the
cost of some additional complexity, but this adds relatively little to the basic
understanding of the situations. The first situation to be considered is the behavior of a
natural roll cue ball after collision with an object ball. This special case is particularly
central to pool and billiards because of the special importance of natural roll.

Problem 4.13: What is the angle of deflection of a natural roll cue ball as a function of
the object ball cut angle after the collision and after natural roll is achieved by both balls?

                                                 52
(ignore friction between the balls)
Answer: With no ball-ball friction, the initial cue ball deflection direction is π/2 (90
degrees) from the object ball cut angle. In terms of unit vectors ˆi ′ and ˆj′ in the x' and y'
coordinate directions respectively in Fig. 4.2, the initial velocity vectors immediately
after collision are given by
                        (
        Vb = V 0 cos( ) cos( )ˆi ′ − sin( )ˆj′ )
        Vc = V 0 sin( )(sin( )ˆi ′ + cos( )ˆj′) .
The cut angle å is the angle between vectors Vb and V0. There is no initial object ball
angular velocity immediately after the collision, so only the speed changes and not the
direction upon achieving natural roll. The final natural roll velocity is given by
                                         (
        Vb,NR = 57 Vb = 57 V 0 cos( ) cos( )ˆi ′ + sin( )ˆj′ .       )
The situation is somewhat different for the cue ball. The cue ball has natural roll before
                     ′ , and this angular velocity is unchanged by the collision with the
the collision, V0= R 0y
object ball. The ball-cloth friction from this initial angular velocity creates a force
component in the ˆi ′ direction only. The final velocity vector for the cue ball is
        V  c,NR                      (7 0                        ) (7 0
               = 5 V + 2 V ˆi ′ = 5 V sin2 ( ) + 2 V ˆi ′ + 5 V sin( )cos( ) ˆj′ .
                   7     c   7   0                     7     0                             )
The cue ball deflection angle œ, relative to the velocity vector V0, after natural roll is
achieved, is determined by
                 sin( )cos( )
       tan( ) =
                  sin2 ( ) + 25
Immediately after the collision, the cue ball path is a parabola as determined in P2.3. The
frictional force accelerates the cue ball until natural roll is achieved. At the point that
natural roll is achieved, the cue ball rolls in a straight line with no acceleration. The
angle between this straight line and the initial velocity direction V0 is the deflection angle
œ which satisfies the above equation.

Problem 4.14: Show that tan(         + ) = 72 tan( )
                                                                          tan( ) + tan( )
Answer: Using the tangent addition relation tan(            + )=                          with
                                                                         1 − tan( )tan( )
           sin( )              sin( )cos( )
tan( ) =          and tan( ) =                gives
           cos( )               sin2 ( ) + 25

        tan(      + )=
                                 (
                         sin( ) sin 2 ( ) + cos2 ( ) + 25   ) = 7 tan( )
                                     2 cos(                      2
                                     5        )

Problem 4.15: What cut angle å maximizes the natural roll deflection angle œ?
                                                             (              )
Answer: Rewrite the above expression as = arctan 72 tan( ) − . Differentiate with

                                                  53
respect to å to obtain
         d             14
             =                   − 1.
        d        4 + 45sin 2 ( )
Setting the derivative to zero and solving for å gives
                             2
           ( max ) = arcsin      = 0.49088 =           [= 28.125 deg]
                             3                6.3999
Note that this is just a bit thicker than a half-ball hit, which is a π⁄6 or a 30 degree cut
angle (neglecting collision induced throw).

Problem 4.16: What is the maximum deflection angle œ for a natural-roll cue ball
collision?
Answer: Substitution of ( max ) gives

                         (
         max = arctan 2 tan
                      7
                              ((   max )   )) − (   max )

                 = − 2 ( max ) = 0.58903 =          [= 33.749 deg]
                2                           5.3335
This is very useful to know because a natural-roll cue ball carom at this angle is
intrinsically more accurate than a cut shot with the same cut angle as demonstrated in the
following problem.

Problem 4.17: If the object ball is cut about 2 degrees away from that corresponding to
the maximum deflection angle as determined in P4.15, what is the change in the cue ball
deflection angle?
Answer: If the cut angle is 2 degrees less, then
                     (             )
          = arctan 72 tan(26deg) − 26deg = 33.64deg
which is 0.11 degrees away from the maximal value as determined in P4.16. If the cut
angle is 2 degrees more, corresponding to a half-ball hit of 30 degrees, then
                     (             )
          = arctan 72 tan(30deg) − 30deg = 33.67deg
which is 0.08 degrees away from the maximal value. In both cases, the cue ball
deflection angle is much more stable to small deviations than the object ball cut angle.

Problem 4.18: What is the relation between the cut angle å and the natural roll deflection
angle œ for small cut angles å?
Answer: For small angles (measured in radians), tan( x) ≈ x . The relation,
tan( + ) = 72 tan( ), from P4.14 then gives
          ≈ 52           [for small å].
This relation is useful to know when playing position using natural roll on nearly straight-
in shots. It is difficult to achieve a larger amount of topspin than V 0=R∑0 with a direct
cue-tip/cue-ball shot due to the risk of miscue (see P1.7). However, higher spin/speed

                                                    54
ratios can be achieved with carom shots. A higher spin/speed ratio would result in a
smaller factor than that in the above equation.

Problem 4.19: What is the cut angle å at which exactly half of the kinetic energy of a
natural-roll cue ball is transferred to the object ball? What is the corresponding natural
roll deflection angle œ? At this angle, what are the final kinetic energies of both balls?
Answer: When the cue ball has natural roll, V 0=R∑0, the total kinetic energy is
         T = 12 MV 02 + 12 I 02 = 107 MV02
The energy of the object ball immediately after collision is
       Tb = 12 MV b2 = 12 MV 02 cos 2 ( )
Setting Tb=1⁄2T and simplifying gives

                         ( ) = 0.57964 = 5.4199 [= 33.211 deg]
          ( 12 T) = arccos
                              7
                             10

This angle is unchanged as the object ball achieves natural roll. The corresponding
deflection angle after natural roll of the cue ball is achieved is
                           7                 
         ( 12 T ) = arctan  2 tan( ( 12 T ) ) − ( 12 T ) = 2 ( 12 T ) − ( 12 T ) = ( 12 T )

The relation 7 2 tan( ( 1 T ) ) = tan 2 ( 1 T )  , used to simplify the above expression, may be
                           2                    2

verified using the tangent addition formula in P4.14. Therefore, when the final deflection
angles are equal for both balls, then each ball has the same kinetic energy immediately
after the collision. Note that the cut angle at which this occurs is just a bit thinner than
that for a half-ball hit (which would be 30 degrees, neglecting collision induced throw).
        The final object ball and cue ball kinetic energies, using Vb,NR and Vc,NR from
P4.13 are
         Tb, NR = 12 MV b,NR
                         2
                                  (
                              = T0 25    2
                                   49 cos ( )  )
        Tc,NR = 12 MV c,2 NR = T0 ( 25
                                    49 sin ( ) + 49 sin ( ) + 49 + 49 sin ( )cos ( ))
                                          4      20    2      4    25    4      2

where T0 is the initial cue ball translational energy. These relations are satisfied for any
cut angle å. Substitution of cos2( ( 1 T) )=7/10 and sin2( ( 1 T) )=3/10 for the specific half-
                                        2                        2

energy cut angle results in
       Tb, NR = Tc, NR = 145 T .
                              0
Not only is the energy divided equally between the two balls upon collision with a cut
angle of ( 1 T) , but the final energies of the two balls are equal after both balls achieve
            2

natural roll. The distance that a ball rolls after achieving natural roll, neglecting
subsequent cushion and ball collisions, is directly proportional to the natural roll kinetic
energy. This relation is useful in situations in which it is necessary that both the object
ball and the cue ball roll the same distance, and as a point of reference when unequal
distances are required.

                                                55
       In Fig. 4.7 the deflection angle œ of a natural roll cue ball, as determined in P4.13
and P4.14, is plotted as a function of the object ball cut angle å. Also shown on the same
graph is the derivative curve   ( ) as determined in P4.14. The points on this curve
                                d
                                 d
                                     NR

corresponding to a half-ball hit, the maximum deflection angle      ( NR:max ) from P4.14,
and the deflection angle corresponding to splitting the kinetic energy as determined in
P4.19, are also plotted. The derivative curve is monotonic in the range shown in Fig. 4.7
(in general, it is an even function, symmetric about å=0). The derivative curve starts with
a value of 5⁄2 at å=0 (see P4.15), decreases to the value of zero at ( max ) , and then
approaches its asymptotic value of -5⁄7 as the cut angle approaches π/2. Another point of
interest shown in Fig. 4.7 is the value of the cut angle å at which the slope   ( ) has a
                                                                                d
                                                                                 d
                                                                                     NR

value of one. This occurs at åcrit= arcsin   ( 115 ) =.26116 [=14.963 deg]. For cut angles
                d
less than åcrit, d NR >1 and the natural roll cue ball trajectory is more sensitive than the
object ball trajectory to small variations in the cut angle. However for the rest of the
                      d
range of cut angles, d NR <1 and the cue ball trajectory is less sensitive than the object
ball trajectory. Less sensitivity means that it is easier for the shooter to control, and this
may be used to advantage, for example, in placing the cue ball more precisely in position
and safety play.

                                                56
                               3.5

                                 3

                               2.5
 Cue Ball Deflection Angle œ

                                                                                  ( , 2) RNR = (0.68472,1.5708 )
                                 2

                               1.5                                                             
                                                                                                            , Stun  = (0.7854,0.7854 )
                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                     2 T0

                                 1                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                  =
                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                              T   , RNR  = (0.99116,0.99116 )
                                                                                                                            2

                                                                                                                                                                  RNR
                               0.5

                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                  Stun
                                                                                              1
                                                                                                 T   , NR = (0.57964,0.57964 )
                                                                                               2 0

                                 0                                                   ( halfball , NR ) = (0.52360,0.58766 )
                                           d NR 
                                                                            (   NR:max
                                                                                      , NR :max ) = (0.49088,0.58903 )
                                            ,      = (0.26116,1.0 )                                                                                                NR
                                             d 

                               -0.5                                                                                                                               d NR
                                                                                                                                                                   d
                                -1
                                      0           0.2            0.4      0.6    0.8     1     1.2                                           1.4            1.6
                                                                       Object Ball Cut Angle å

Fig. 4.7. The post-collision natural roll cue ball deflection angle is shown
as a function of the object ball cut angle. The œNR curve is applicable
when the cue ball has natural roll before the collision. œStun is when the
cue ball has no spin before the collision. œ RNR is when the cue ball has
reverse natural roll before the collision. The straight line œ=å corresponds
to an equal splitting of the kinetic energy after both balls achieve natural
roll. Also shown is the dashed curve defined by                                                                   ( ) . Several
                                                                                                                    d
                                                                                                                      d
                                                                                                                            NR

important individual points on each of these curves are also shown as
discussed in the text.

                                                                                  57
Problem 4.20: If the cue ball is not rotating upon impact with the object ball (a stun
shot), at what cut angle å is half of the kinetic energy transferred? What are the final
energies of the balls? (neglect any frictional forces between the balls)
Answer: Taking the velocities immediately after the collision from P4.13, the initial
kinetic energies are
         Tb = 12 MV b2 = 12 MV 02 cos 2 ( )

        Tc = 12 MV c2 = 12 MV02 sin 2 ( )
Equating these two energies gives
       tan 2 ( ) = 1
          = arctan(1) =        [= 45 deg]
                           4
Each ball has initially after the collision an energy of 1⁄2T0. Since neither ball has any
angular velocity immediately after the collision, both balls slow down upon achieving
natural roll by 5⁄7 of the initial ball velocities. There is no change of angle, since the
velocity directions of the balls do not change. The natural roll kinetic energy of each ball
is then (1⁄2)(5⁄7)2T0=(25⁄98)T0. Compared to the results of P4.19 involving natural roll of
the cue ball, it is seen that the cut angle is thinner and that the final energies of both balls
are smaller relative to T0 with a stun shot than with natural roll. This half-energy cut
angle point for stun shots is shown on the œ Stun curve in Fig. 4.7. The œStun curve is a
straight line that ranges from the limiting values of œStun=π/2, at cut angle å=0, to
œStun=0, at å=π/2.

Problem 4.21: What is the natural roll cue ball deflection angle as a function of the cue
ball spin ∑0y at the moment of collision and the object ball cut angle?
Answer: Generalizing the results of P4.13, it is convenient to write the natural roll cue
ball velocity in terms of the spin/speed ratio J0y.=(R∑0y/V0).
        V c,NR                                  (               )
                = 5 V + 2 V J ˆi ′ = 5 V sin2 ( ) + 2 J ˆi ′ + 5 V (sin( )cos( )) ˆj′
                  7   c   7   0 0y     7    0            5 0y       7   0
The cue ball deflection angle is determined by the ratio of the two components.
                  sin( )cos( )
       tan( ) =
                 sin 2 ( ) + 25 J0y
Using the tangent addition relation, this may be written as
                     1 + 2 J 0y 
       tan( + ) =  2 5           tan( )
                     5 J 0y 
For the natural roll condition, J0y=+1, these results all agree with those of P4.13-P4.14.

Problem 4.22: In P4.19 and P4.20 it is seen that a particular cut angle splits evenly both
the initial kinetic energy and the natural roll kinetic energies of the two balls. Under what

                                                    58
conditions will a cut angle split both energies? (assume ∑z=0)
Answer: Half of the initial kinetic energy is transferred when Tb=1⁄2T0. This occurs when
                   (
       cos2 ( ) = 12 + 15 J0y
                            2
                              )
where J 0y is the spin/speed ratio (R∑0y/V0). The natural roll kinetic energy is split evenly
when Tb,NR=Tc,NR. Using the previous natural roll conditions, this occurs when
                       (
       cos2 ( NR ) = 12 + 15 J0y  )
The angles å and åNR are equal only when
       J0y (J0y – 1) = 0
There are only two possible solutions to this equation: J0y =1, the natural roll situation
discussed in P4.19, and J0y =0, the stun shot condition discussed in P4.20. For other
spin/speed ratios, there will be one angle å that splits the initial kinetic energy, and a
separate angle åNR that splits evenly the natural roll kinetic energies.

Problem 4.23: If the cue ball has reverse natural roll (RNR), V0=- R 0y  ′ , what is the
relation between the cut angle å and the natural roll deflection angle œ?
Answer: For reverse natural roll, J0y =-1. Referring to the result in P4.21,
        tan( + ) = − 32 tan( )
The sign factor in this equation indicates that (å+œ) is in a different quadrant than å.
Specifically, 0≤å≤π⁄2 is always in the first quadrant, and π⁄2≤(œ+å)≤π is always in the
second quadrant. Taking the appropriate quadrant for œ gives the relation
                  (           )
          = arctan − 32 tan( ) − + .
For small cut angle å, it is seen that
         ≈ − 52              [for small å]
The same factor of 5⁄2 is seen for the RNR draw shot as for the (topspin) natural roll shot
in P4.15. However, in the case of a draw shot the deviation is away from the reverse
direction π (or 180 degrees), rather than the forward direction. As in the case with
topspin, it is difficult to achieve a larger amount of draw than V0=–R∑0 with a normal
direct cue-tip/cue-ball shot due to the risk of miscue (see P1.7). However, higher
spin/speed ratios can be achieved with carom and masse shots.

Problem 4.24: In P4.19 and P4.20 it is seen that the kinetic energy of the cue ball and
object ball is split evenly when the cut angle is equal to the cue ball deflection angle for
J0y=1 and J0y=0. Show that this condition is true for arbitrary J0y. What is the cut angle
that splits the natural roll energy of a reverse natural roll collision? How does this angle
compare to the natural roll angle from P4.19.
Answer: From P4.22, the post-collision natural roll kinetic energy is split evenly when
           (           )               (          )
cos2 ( ) = 12 + 15 J0y and sin2 ( ) = 12 − 15 J0y . Substitution of these relations into the
general deflection angle equation of P4.21 gives

                                             59
                      sin( )cos( )      sin( )cos( )
        tan( ) =                      =
                     sin ( ) + 25 J0y
                        2                  cos2 ( )
               = tan( )
or in general œ = å when the natural roll kinetic energy is split evenly. This line is shown
in Fig. 4.7. The above equation for the cut angle may be written as
          =    = arcsin     ( − J )
                             1
                             2
                                     1
                                     5 0y
In particular, for reverse natural roll, J0y=-1, the half-energy cut angle is given by
          1
          2
            T, RNR   = arcsin   ( ) = 0.99116 = 3.1696 [= 56.789deg]
                                      7
                                     10

From comparison with P4.19, it is seen that           1 T,RNR +       1 T, NR = 2 .     This is an example
                                                      2               2
of the general relation
          1 T,J  + 1 T,− J           =2
          2   0y        2       0y

which follows from the relation, cos2 (     1
                                              T, J0 y   ) = sin 2 (   1
                                                                        T ,−J 0 y   )
                                            2                         2

        The reverse natural roll deflection angle is shown as a function of the object ball
cut angle in Fig. 4.7. Considering œRNR as a function of cut angle å, it is seen that œRNR
ranges from zero, for very thin cuts, to π, for very thick cuts. In contrast œNR from P4.15
only ranged from zero to a bit over π/6. Since natural roll topspin and reverse natural roll
backspin represent the practical extremes of cue ball spin (neglecting collision effects and
masse), the area between the œNR and œ RNR curves in Fig. 4.7 respresents all possible
practically allowed shots. The area between the œStun curve and the œRNR curve
represents all possible draw shots, and the area between the œStun and œ NR curves
represents all possible topspin shots. Inspection shows that the area associated with draw
shots is much larger than that associated with topspin shots. This means that there is
much more flexibility with respect to carom angles with draw than with topspin, and
correspondingly, that topspin shots are usually less sensitive than draw shots to variations
in the cut angle or amount of spin. It may be seen in Fig. 4.7 that œRNR is almost a
straight line, with an average slope of about twice that of œStun. Since œStun is relatively
easy to determine, this allows in turn œRNR to be estimated for any cut angle simply by
multiplying œStun by 2. Inspection of Fig. 4.7 shows that this simple factor will always
overestimate the actual deflection angle. The following problem demonstrates the
magnitude of error of this approximation.

Problem 4.25: At what cut angle does a reverse natural roll cue ball deflect at exactly a
right angle?
Answer: From P4.23, the desired cut angle satisfies the relation
        tan( ⊥ + 2 ) = − 32 tan( ⊥ )

                                                 60
Using the identity tan( ⊥ + 2 ) = −1 tan( ⊥ ) , å⊥ may be determined to be

          ⊥ = arctan   ( ) = 0.68472 = 4.5881 [= 39.232deg]
                          2
                          3

This point is plotted on the œRNR curve in Fig. 4.7. The simple “factor of 2” estimate
from the stun-shot curve would have predicted this angle to be π/4 (or 45 degrees), which
would have been about 12% in error. The correct cut angle å⊥ is about midway between
a half-ball cut angle and the π/4 angle.

Problem 4.26: For a given cut angle å, what sidespin/speed ratio will result in no
horizontal tangential frictional forces?
Answer: The surfaces of the balls must not slide against each other in order for the
frictional forces to vanish during the collision. The velocity of the cue ball contact point
just before the collision is the sum of the linear velocity V0 and the instantaneous velocity
due to the angular velocity about the vertical axis ∑ × r . The contact point velocity is
given by
        Vcp = V 0 cos( )ˆi + (V 0 sin( ) + R 0z )ˆj − R ′0y cos( )kˆ

             = V cpx ˆi + V cpyˆj + V cpz kˆ
When Vcpy=0, then the horizontal frictional forces vanish. Solving for the ratio R∑0z/V0
gives
            R 0z
      J0z =        = − sin( )
              V0

Problem 4.27: Using the initial spin/speed ratio and the final natural roll spin/speed ratio
from P3.6, and the Vcpy=0 relation from P4.26, what cue tip contact points will result in
no horizontal tangential frictional forces between the two colliding balls with a cut angle
å?
Answer: For the spin/speed ratio immediately after cue tip contact, the contact points are
given by the vertical line satisfying
                      ′
                  5ytip
        sin( ) =
                   2R
Note that the object ball contact point satisfies the relation, y'cp=–Rsin(å). This gives the
relation between y' tip and y'cp as
          ′ = − 25 ycp
        ytip        ′
The sign difference means that the cue tip impact parameter is in the opposite hemisphere
from the object ball contact point. Note that in the limit of an extreme cut shot of angle
π/2, this result agrees with that of P3.5; that is, “sideways natural roll” is achieved with a
horizontal impact parameter of 2/5R. This relation is useful when the object ball collision
occurs very soon after the cue tip contact, before the friction between the ball and cloth
has time to change the velocity.

                                               61
        When the cue ball is allowed to achieve natural roll before colliding with the
object ball, the desired cue tip contact points satisfy
                   7  ytip
                         ′ 
        sin( ) =           
                   2  ztip 
                  2 ycp
                      ′ 
          ′ = −
        ytip               z
                  7R  tip
For a given cut angle å, this is a straight line that passes through the origin (0,0). An easy
way to estimate the sets of points defined by this straight line is as follows. Refer to Fig.
4.8. Determine the correct contact point at height ztip =7⁄5R. At this contact point, natural
roll would be achieved immediately (see P3.5), and the natural roll horizontal offset is the
same as the initial horizontal offset determined above, namely the contact point would be
(y,'z)=(-2⁄5y'cp,7⁄5R). The set of desired points is then given by drawing a straight line
between this particular contact point and the point at the very bottom of the ball (0,0). In
particular, the point on this straight line that is the minimum distance from the center is
on the small circle as shown in P3.7.

                                              z
                                                             Set of desired
                                                             contact points

  Object ball contact           ycp                   (-2/5ycp,7/5R)
   point on rear of                                                        Point of minimal
         ball                                                             displacement from
                                                                                 center

   “Small Circle” of
   aim points

                  y

                                           (0,0)
        Fig. 4.8. The set of cue tip contacts points that correspond to no
        (horizontal) frictional forces when the cue ball achieves natural roll prior
        to collision with the object ball fall on a straight line. The object ball
        contact point depends on the cut angle. The slope of the line depends on
        the object ball contact point y'cp as indicated.

                                             62
5. Statistics
        The mathematical fields of statistical analysis, combinatorial analysis, stochastic
analysis, and game theory are all useful in both physics and pool, and they are all
interesting fields of study for the amateur. Statistical methods, which is used here in a
general way to include all of these fields, can be used to assess performance, to judge a
technique or strategy, and to predict future outcomes based on previous and perhaps
incomplete information. These and other uses of statistics will be examined in this
section. First some elementary background material and notation will be introduced.

       The average, or arithmetic mean, of a set of values {xi}, called a population, is
           1 N
       x = ∑ xi
           N i =1
N is the number of values and the index i runs over the members of the set. There can be
repetitions among the values xi, and it may be more convenient to sum over the distinct
values {yi}, weighted by their repetitions {ni}, rather than the individual members of the
sample space. In this case the mean may be written as
            N val         N val          N val
        x = ∑ ni yi       ∑ ni where N = ∑ ni
            i=1           i =1            i =1
The probability for each distinct value is
             n
        pi = i
             N
and these form a set of nonnegative numbers {pi}; this gives another useful expression
for the mean.
            N val
        x = ∑ pi yi
            i=1
Note that the mean does not necessarily correspond to a member of the sample set.
        The set of probabilities {pi} and the corresponding distinct values {yi} defines the
probability distribution. For many purposes, it is convenient to consider the probability
as a function of the value, p(y). For an ordered set of values {yi}, say with yi<yi+1, and
corresponding probabilities {pi}, there is a cumulative probability defined by
                    m
         cum
        pm   =      ∑ pi = pcum
                            m−1 + pm
                    i=1
The cumulative probability increases monotonically to its maximum value of 1. It is
sometimes useful to study properties of various subsets of the population, and the
cumulative probability is often used to pick out, for example, the bottom third, or the
middle third, or the top quartile, or the top 5%.
       Another useful property of a distribution is the median. Suppose that the
individual members of the sample space xi are ordered by value. The median of the

                                                 63
sample is the value of the INT((N+1)/2) element in the ordered list, where INT() implies
truncation to an integer value. (There are several conventions used to handle the situation
in which there is an even number of members, and the two middle members have
different values; for simplicity, this situation will not be considered in this section.) In
terms of the ordered probability distribution, the median is determined by the smallest
value m which satisfies
          cum 1
         pm    ≥
                 2
The median of the set {xi} is denoted x˜ . If the members of the sample space are chosen
randomly, then it is just as likely that a value less than the median will be picked as a
value that is greater than the median.
        The distribution maximum or mode is the value corresponding to the largest
probability value. For a given set, a maximum may not exist, or it may not be unique. If
the distribution is symmetric and centrally peaked, then the mode, the median, and the
mean will all be the same. If the probability distribution is symmetric, but not necessarily
peaked, then the median and the mean are the same but the mode may be different. If the
distribution is skewed, meaning that it is not peaked about a central value, then the mean,
the median, and the mode will generally have all different values.
        Another important value that characterizes a sample set is the standard deviation,
which, like the mean, may be computed in various ways in terms of the sample elements,
repetition counts, and probability distributions.
                  N                    N val             N val

                  ∑ ( xi − x ) =       ∑ ni ( yi − x) = ∑ pi ( yi − x)2
              1             2      1                2
          =
              N                    N
                  i=1                  i =1              i=1

                  N                Nval                 Nval        
                   ∑                      ∑                      ∑
                1                     1
           =         xi  − x = 
                       2      2              ni yi  − x = 
                                                 2      2         pi yi2  − x 2
               N i=1               N i=1                i =1        
If the sample values are very tightly clustered about the mean value, then ß will be small,
and if the sample values are broadly spread apart then ß will be large. The variance is
defined as the quantity ß2.

Problem 5.1: Given the set {x}={0,1,1,4,5}, compute the mean using all three methods,
the median, the mode, and the standard deviation. What are these same quantities for the
set {x}={0,1,1,8,9}.
Answer: For the first set, the distinct values and corresponding probabilities are
{yi}={0,1,4,5} and {pi}={1⁄5,2⁄5,1⁄5,1⁄5}. The mean may be written as
            0 + 1 + 1 + 4 + 5 0 + 2 ⋅1 + 4 + 5 1
        x=                    =                 = 5 ⋅0 + 25 ⋅1+ 15 ⋅ 4 + 15 ⋅ 5 = 11
                    5             1 + 2 + 1+ 1                                     5
The median is the value of the third element (i.e. (5+1)/2) in this ordered list, x˜ =x3=1.
The largest distribution value is p2=2⁄5, so the mode is y2=1. In this case the mode and

                                               64
the median happen to have the same value, but they both differ from the mean. The
standard deviation of the first set is
               0 2 + 2 ⋅12 + 4 2 + 52  11 2          94
          =                               −  =          = 1.939
                           5                  5        25
       For the second set the mean is
       x = 15 ⋅ 0 + 25 ⋅1 + 15 ⋅8 + 15 ⋅ 9 = 19
                                              5
and the standard deviation is ß=Sqrt(374/25)=3.868. For this set, the median is still
 x˜ =x3=1, and the distribution maximum p2=2⁄5 still occurs for y 2=1, the same as for the
first set. For both sets, the mean value does not correspond to a set member. The
standard deviation is larger for the second set than for the first set, reflecting the wider
range of values.

        It is sometimes useful to merge various subsets of values into one large set. If the
subset size, mean, and standard deviation is known for each of the subsets, then it is
possible to compute the size, mean, and standard deviation of the combined set without
knowing the individual values. The parameters of the combined set are given by
         N=   ∑  Ni
                  i

                      ∑ Ni xi
              1
        x=
              N
                       i

                       ∑ Ni i2 + N1 ∑ Ni ( xi − x )2
          2       1
              =
                  N
                           i          i
The summations in these equations are over the subsets, not the individual elements. The
combined average is simply the weighted average of the subset averages. The variance of
the combined set contains two contributions, the first is the weighted mean of the subset
variances, and the second is the weighted variance of the subset means.

Problem 5.2: Compute the mean and variance for the combined set
{0,0,1,1,1,1,4,5,8,9}={0,1,1,4,5}⊕ {0,1,1,8,9} using the results from P5.1.
Answer: N=5+5=10
        x =(5(11⁄5)+5(19⁄5))/10=3
        σ2=(5(94⁄25)+5(374⁄25)+5(11⁄5-3)2+5(19⁄5-3)2)/10=10
It may be verified that these values agree with those computed using the individual
elements of the combined set.

       In some situations the sample space is only a subset of a larger population space.
The sample space may be used to estimate the statistical parameters (mean, median,
mode, standard deviation, etc.) of the population space, or the population space statistics

                                                  65
may be used to predict possible subspace statistics. In some cases the population space
may be too large to handle, or may even be infinite in size, in which case only a smaller
sample space is available. There are two conceptual ways of constructing a sample space.
One way is by randomly choosing elements from the population space, and setting aside
the member once it has been chosen so that it cannot be drawn again; the other way is to
replace the elements as they are chosen so that they may be chosen again. Some care
must be taken with this choice to ensure that the sample space gives the best possible
representation of the population space.
        Suppose a population space consists of N distinguishable objects (e.g. numbered
slips of paper). If one member of this set is chosen, and if the probability for all the
members is the same (e.g. the slips are the same size and mixed well before selection),
then there are N possible, equally likely, outcomes. Now consider choosing two
members of the set, without replacement. What is the number of possible outcomes?
The act of drawing two objects can be thought of conceptually in two steps: drawing one
object, setting it aside, and then drawing the second object. There are N possible
outcomes after the first draw, and (N-1) possible outcomes for the second draw, so it
would appear that there might be N(N-1) possible outcomes. However, if the order of
drawing the two objects is unimportant, then this overcounts the outcomes by a factor of
two, and the correct answer would be N(N-1)/2. In the general case, what is the number
of possible outcomes for choosing m distinguishable objects where the order that they
might be drawn is unimportant? The answer is the binomial coefficient which is written
          N =       N!        N ( N − 1)( N − 2)L( N − m + 1)
          m m!( N − m)!     =
                                           1⋅2 ⋅ 3Lm
The numerator in the last expression is the number of ways to select the m objects one at
a time, without replacement, from the population space, and the denominator is the
number of permutations of these objects to account for the fact that their order is
irrelevant. The binomial coefficient  m is often pronounced “N choose m” to stress this
                                           N

important relationship. Binomial coefficients satisfy the recursion
         N =  N − 1 +  N − 1
         m  m − 1  m 

with the boundary conditions  0  =  N  = 1. This leads to “Pascal’s Triangle”
                                 N        N

                                                          1
                                                     1         1
                                                1         2         1
                                            1        3         3         1
                                        1       4         6         4        1
                                    1       5        10        10        5       1
                                1       6       15        20        15       6       1
                            …                             …                              …
in which the row is determined by N and the element within the row corresponds to m. In
the triangle, each element is the sum of the two nearby elements in the row above it, a

                                                          66
result of the two-term recursion. The name “binomial coefficient” comes from the fact
that these numbers are the coefficients of the individual elements in the term-by-term
expansion of (p+q)n.
                      n
        ( p + q) =
                 n
                     ∑  mn  pm qn−m = q n + npqn−1 +K+npn−1q + pn
                     m=0

Problem 5.3: Given the sample set {1,2,3,4}, enumerate all of the ways of choosing zero,
one, two, three, and four elements without replacement.
Answer: There is 1 way to choose zero elements: {}; there are 4 different ways to choose
one element: {1}, {2}, {3}, and {4}; there are 6 ways to choose two elements: {1,2},
{1,3}, {1,4}, {2,3}, {2,4}, and {3,4}; there are 4 ways to choose three elements: {1,2,3},
{1,2,4}, {1,3,4}, and {2,3,4}; there is 1 way to choose four elements: {1,2,3,4}. These
numbers, 1, 4, 6, 4, and 1, agree with the n=4 row of Pascal’s triangle and with the
closed-form expression for the binomial coefficients.

        Suppose that the probability for a “successful” event to occur is p. The
probability for a failure is q=(1-p). If the sample space is infinite, or if the space is finite
and the sampling is done with replacements, then the probability for success does not
change upon repetition and the probability for two consecutive successes is p2. The
probability for a single success and a single failure is 2pq, because there are two ways to
arrive at this result, each of which has probability pq. The probability of two failures is
q2. In the general case, the probability of obtaining m successes and n failures after
                                           m+ n
N=n+m attempts is given by P(p;m,n)=  m  pm q n . Comparison with the binomial

expansion shows that this probability is the mth term in the expansion of (p+q)(m+n) ;
consequently such distributions are called binomial distributions.

Problem 5.4: Two players are playing 9-ball, and the probability that player-1 will win
an individual game is p=2⁄3. What is the probability that after 4 games the score will be
3:1? Enumerate all the possible ways of arriving at this game score.
Answer: Using the above equation the probability is
                          ( )( )     ( )( )
        P(2⁄3;3,1)=  1 23 13 = 4 27
                       4     3 1     8 1 = 32 = 0.395
                                        3   81

There are four ways of arriving at this game score: LWWW, WLWW, WWLW, and
WWWL. The probability of each of these individual ways occurring is
        ( ) ( 13 ) = 0.0988 .
             3   1
p 3q1 = 23

Problem 5.5: Two players are playing 9-ball, and the probability that player-1 will win
an individual game is p=2⁄3. The match is handicapped at 3:2, meaning that player-1

                                               67
must win 3 games whereas player-2 must win only 2 games in order to win the match.
What is the probability that player-1 will win this match? If the match is handicapped at
N1:N2, what is the general expression that player-1 will win?
Answer: There are two ways that player-1 can win the match handicapped at 3:2, namely
3:0, and 3:1. In order to arrive at a 3:0 score, player-1 must win the last game from a 2:0
                                                           ( ) ( )()
score; the probability for this to occur is pP(p;2,0)= 23  0 23 13 = 27
                                                             2     2  0   8 = 0.296 . In

order to arrive at a 3:1 score, player-1 must win the last game from a 2:1 score; the
                                           ( ) ( )()
probability for this to occur is pP(p;2,1)= 23  1 23 13 = 27
                                                  3     2  1  8 = 0.296 . The probability

of player-1 winning the match is the sum of these two terms, W=16/27=0.593.
         In the general case, there are N2 ways for player-1 to win the match: N1:0, N1:1,
..., N1:(N2-1). The probability for the individual N 1:m case is pP(p;N1-1,m). The
probability that player-1 will win the match is the sum over all of the individual
probabilities
                           N 2 −1                  N2 −1
        W( p; N1 ,N2 ) =   ∑ pP( p; N1 − 1, m) = ∑  N1 +mm − 1 pN qm
                                                                       1

                           m=0                     m=0
In the following two problems, the match probability W is examined, first with the game
probability p fixed and varying the matchup N1 and N2, and then with N1 and N2 fixed
and varying p.

Problem 5.6: Write a computer program to compute a table of values containing
P(p;m,n) for 0≤m≤9 and 0≤n≤9. From this table, compute the corresponding W(p;m,n)
tables for 1≤m≤10 and 1≤n≤10. Compute these tables for p=1⁄2, for which the players are
equally likely to win an individual game, and for p=2⁄3, for which player-1 is twice as
likely to win an individual game as player-2.
Answer: For this purpose, it is better to formulate the P(p;m,n) table construction using
the following recursion approach (which is similar to computing Pascal’s triangle).
         P(p;0,0)=1
         P(p;0,n)=qP(p;0,n-1)                            ; for n=1,2,...9
         P(p;m,0)=pP(p;m-1,0)                            ; for m=1,2,...9
         P(p;m,n)=qP(p;m,n-1)+pP(p;m-1,n)                ; for m=2,...,9 and for n=2,...,9
Basically, this recognizes the fact that to arrive at a score of m:n, either player-1 must win
the last game from a score of (m-1):n, which occurs with probability p, or player-2 must
win from a score of m:(n-1), which occurs with a probability q.
         The W(p;m,n) table is then constructed in a similar manner.
         W(p;m,1)=pP(p;m-1,0)                            ; for m=1,...,10
         W(p;m,n)=W(p;m,n-1)+pP(p;m-1,n-1)               ; for m=1,...,10 and for n=2,...,10
These tables are included below for the two specified values. Note that the P(1⁄2;m,n)
table is symmetric (i.e. P(1⁄2;m,n)=P(1⁄2;n,m)), as would be expected for two equally

                                              68
matched players. Note also that the W( 2⁄3;3,2) entry agrees with the hand-calculated
value from P5.5.
        Such a program may be easily written in almost any programming language or
spreadsheet. It is sometimes handy to have such a program available when directing
tournaments, or even for personal use, in order to determine fair handicapped matchups
between players of varying strengths.

Problem 5.7. Compare the W(p;n,n) and the W(p;2n,n) match probabilities for 1≤n≤10
numerically as a function of the game probability p.
Answer: Using the computer program from P5.6, the appropriate elements of the W table
may be determined as a function of p. These match probabilities are shown in Fig. 5.1.
In general, it may be observed that each curve of W(p;m,n) is an increasing function of
the game probability p. It is seen that W(1⁄2;n,n)=1⁄2 for all matches. This means that if
player-1 is the stronger player, p>1⁄2, it is to his advantage to play a longer even matchup
rather than a shorter match, but if player-1 is the weaker player, p<1⁄2, then it is to his
advantage to play a shorter match. A beginner might be able to win a game (i.e. a 1:1
match) against a professional, but it is most unlikely that he would win a longer 10:10
match.
        There is no single common point of exact intersection for the W(p;2n,n) curves;
these curves cross at slightly different values of p. If a match probability of W=1⁄2 is
defined as “fair”, then it is clear in Fig. 5.1 that player-1 must have a larger game
probability p to survive a 2:1 match than a 4:2 match. An interesting region occurs for
the 2:1 and 4:2 curves after they intersect (W(.641;2,1)=W(.641;4,2)=.411) but before the
point corresponding to W(.686;4,2)=1⁄2. In this domain, .641<p<.686, W< 1⁄2 for both
curves, so player-1 is expected to lose both matches, yet it is still to his advantage to play
the longer match. This handicapped situation is in contrast to the even-matchup situation
in which the expected winner always benefits from the longer match. Such a domain
exists for the other pairs of 2n:n matchup curves, but it becomes much smaller because
the curves are steeper for longer matches. Furthermore, in the domain .5<p<.641, before
the 2:1 and 4:2 curves intersect, player-1 is the stronger player but his best chances of
winning are with the shorter 2:1 match. Again, this is in contrast to the even-matchup
situation in which the stronger player always benefited the most with longer matches.

                                              69
P(1⁄2;m,n)
 m\n       0         1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9
  0        1.000     0.500   0.250   0.125   0.063   0.031   0.016   0.008   0.004   0.002
  1        0.500     0.500   0.375   0.250   0.156   0.094   0.055   0.031   0.018   0.010
  2        0.250     0.375   0.375   0.313   0.234   0.164   0.109   0.070   0.044   0.027
  3        0.125     0.250   0.313   0.313   0.273   0.219   0.164   0.117   0.081   0.054
  4        0.063     0.156   0.234   0.273   0.273   0.246   0.205   0.161   0.121   0.087
  5        0.031     0.094   0.164   0.219   0.246   0.246   0.226   0.193   0.157   0.122
  6        0.016     0.055   0.109   0.164   0.205   0.226   0.226   0.209   0.183   0.153
  7        0.008     0.031   0.070   0.117   0.161   0.193   0.209   0.209   0.196   0.175
  8        0.004     0.018   0.044   0.081   0.121   0.157   0.183   0.196   0.196   0.185
  9        0.002     0.010   0.027   0.054   0.087   0.122   0.153   0.175   0.185   0.185
  1
W( ⁄2;m,n)
  m\n      1         2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9       10
   1       0.500     0.750   0.875   0.938   0.969   0.984   0.992   0.996   0.998   0.999
   2       0.250     0.500   0.688   0.813   0.891   0.938   0.965   0.980   0.989   0.994
   3       0.125     0.313   0.500   0.656   0.773   0.855   0.910   0.945   0.967   0.981
   4       0.063     0.188   0.344   0.500   0.637   0.746   0.828   0.887   0.927   0.954
   5       0.031     0.109   0.227   0.363   0.500   0.623   0.726   0.806   0.867   0.910
   6       0.016     0.063   0.145   0.254   0.377   0.500   0.613   0.709   0.788   0.849
   7       0.008     0.035   0.090   0.172   0.274   0.387   0.500   0.605   0.696   0.773
   8       0.004     0.020   0.055   0.113   0.194   0.291   0.395   0.500   0.598   0.685
   9       0.002     0.011   0.033   0.073   0.133   0.212   0.304   0.402   0.500   0.593
  10       0.001     0.006   0.019   0.046   0.090   0.151   0.227   0.315   0.407   0.500
  2
P( ⁄3;m,n)
 m\n       0         1       2       3       4       5       6        7       8       9
  0        1.000     0.333   0.111   0.037   0.012   0.004   0.001   5E-04   2E-04   5E-05
  1        0.667     0.444   0.222   0.099   0.041   0.016   0.006   0.002   9E-04   3E-04
  2        0.444     0.444   0.296   0.165   0.082   0.038   0.017   0.007   0.003   0.001
  3        0.296     0.395   0.329   0.219   0.128   0.068   0.034   0.016   0.007   0.003
  4        0.198     0.329   0.329   0.256   0.171   0.102   0.057   0.030   0.015   0.007
  5        0.132     0.263   0.307   0.273   0.205   0.137   0.083   0.048   0.026   0.013
  6        0.088     0.205   0.273   0.273   0.228   0.167   0.111   0.069   0.040   0.022
  7        0.059     0.156   0.234   0.260   0.238   0.191   0.138   0.092   0.057   0.034
  8        0.039     0.117   0.195   0.238   0.238   0.207   0.161   0.115   0.077   0.048
  9        0.026     0.087   0.159   0.212   0.230   0.214   0.179   0.136   0.096   0.064
  2
W( ⁄3;m,n)
  m\n        1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9       10
   1         0.667   0.889   0.963   0.988   0.996   0.999   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
   2         0.444   0.741   0.889   0.955   0.982   0.993   0.997   0.999   1.000   1.000
   3         0.296   0.593   0.790   0.900   0.955   0.980   0.992   0.997   0.999   0.999
   4         0.198   0.461   0.680   0.827   0.912   0.958   0.980   0.991   0.996   0.998
   5         0.132   0.351   0.571   0.741   0.855   0.923   0.961   0.981   0.991   0.996
   6         0.088   0.263   0.468   0.650   0.787   0.878   0.934   0.965   0.983   0.991
   7         0.059   0.195   0.377   0.559   0.711   0.822   0.896   0.942   0.969   0.984
   8         0.039   0.143   0.299   0.473   0.632   0.759   0.851   0.912   0.950   0.973
   9         0.026   0.104   0.234   0.393   0.552   0.690   0.797   0.873   0.925   0.957
  10         0.017   0.075   0.181   0.322   0.476   0.618   0.737   0.828   0.892   0.935

                                             70
                                                Match Probabilities
                1
                                                                  10:10
                                                            9:9
                                                      8:8
               0.8                                  7:7
                                                    6:6

                                                                                           2:1
               0.6                                                                       4:2
                                                                                      6:3
    W(p;m,n)                                                                         8:4
                                                                                   10:5
                                          5:5
               0.4
                                    4:4
                                  3:3
                                                                            12:6
                               2:2
               0.2                                                         14:7
                         1:1                                             16:8
                                                                      18:9
                                                                     20:10
                0
                     0                  0.2        0.4               0.6           0.8           1
                                                              p

       Fig. 5.1. The match probability W as a function of the individual game
       probability p for even n:n matchups and uneven 2n:n matchups of various
       lengths. For all of the individual curves, the match probability is an
       increasing function of the game probability. The steepness of a curve is
       related to how sensitive is the match outcome to the game probability.

Problem 5.8. A strong player is negotiating a matchup with a weaker opponent and he
knows that his game probability against this opponent is p=2⁄3. He is offered a choice
between a single long match of 9:5, and a 3:1 match of sets where each set is handicapped
at 3:3. Which option is best for player-1?
Answer: At first this seems very complicated, so it is best to break the problem down into
smaller pieces that are easier to understand. Player-1 will win the long match with a
probability of W( 2⁄3;9,5)=.552 according to the table in P5.6. He will win a 3:3 set with a
probability of W( 2⁄3;3,3)=.790, also according to the table in P5.6. The match probability
for the second option is given by W(.790;3,1). That is, the statistical analysis for winning
multiple-set matches is the same as that for winning multiple-game matches, but with the
variable p being the set probability instead of the game probability. This may be
computed using the program in P5.6, or from the polynomial expression from P5.5:
W(p;3,1)=p3. In either case, the result is seen to be W(.790;3,1)=.493. Player-1 would
have a small 5.2% advantage over player-2 in the long-match format, but he would have a

                                                         71
slight 0.7% disadvantage with this particular set format.
        In either case, player-1 must win 9 games total in order to win the match. In the
long match format, player-2 needs to win 5 games to win the match, whereas in the set
format he needs only to win 3 games, provided they are all in the same set. In the set
format, player-2 can win as many as 6 games and still lose the match, provided they are
split evenly with 2 games in each set. There are apparently no shortcuts, based simply on
the total games required by each player, that will give the correct choice in these
negotiations. The actual statistical analysis is required to correctly assess each possible
option.
        In the general case of multiple-set matches, the player-1 match probability is
given by the general expression
                       ( (             )
       W match = W W p; N1set , N2set ;N1match , N2match   )
in which the required games per set and sets per match are indicated and in which p is the
individual game probability for player-1.

        For a given N with N=m+n, binomial distributions characterized by the
probabilities P(p;m,n) are centrally peaked for p≈1⁄2 (i.e. the peak occurs near m≈N/2),
the peak is shifted toward large m values for large p≈1, and the peak is shifted toward
small m values for small p≈0. Because binomial distributions are so common, it is useful
to characterize the peak x˜ , the mean x , and the standard deviation σ in a general way.

Problem 5.9: Compute the mode, the mean, and the standard deviation of a binomial
distribution in terms of N and p.
Answer: The possible values of a binomial distribution correspond to the integers
{m ;m=0,…N} and the corresponding probabilities are given by P(p;m,N-m). The mode,
or distribution peak, occurs for the smallest value of m for which
P(p;m+1,N-m-1)<P(p;m,N-m). The peak of a binomial distribution is given by
         x˜ = msmall = Ceiling( Np - q )
where Ceiling(x) denotes the smallest integer that is greater than or equal to x. The mean
is given by
              N                        N

             ∑   mP( p;m,N − m) = ∑ m
                                          N!
        x=                                        pm q N −m
                                      m!( N − m)!
             m=0                  m=0
             N −1                                       N −1
                      N( N − 1)!
         =   ∑      m!( N − 1− m)!
                                   p m+1q N −1−m = Np   ∑ m!((NN−−11−)!m)! pm q N −1−m
             m=0                                    m=0

        = Np( p + q)     N−1
                        = Np
The mean and the mode of a binomial distribution differ by, at most, one. A similar

                                              72
sequence of operations gives the standard deviation of a binomial distribution.
         = Npq

         An important property of the binomial distribution is that for large N, it
approaches the normal distribution defined by
                    1     − 1 ( x− x ) 2 2
         P(x) =          e 2
                     2
This distribution is symmetric about the mean and is peaked at the mean. It is often
useful to shift and scale the domain of the distribution using the equation z = ( x − x ) .
In terms of these dimensionless transformed values, called standard units, the normal
distribution takes the simple form
                  1 − 12 z 2
         P(z) =        e
                  2
In this standard form, the normal distribution is peaked at z=0 and has a standard
deviation of σ=1. Areas under the normal distribution correspond to various cumulative
probabilities. However, the form of the normal distribution does not allow for a simple
closed-form expression of the antiderivative, so integrals must be computed numerically
or interpolated from tables. One form for these tables is in terms of the symmetric
                         zc
integral Pcum (zc ) =   ∫−P(z)dz
                          z   c
                                 . The following short table gives some of the more

commonly used cumulative probabilities and their corresponding critical values zc.

Table 5.1. Normal Distribution Critical Values
  Pcum(zc)     .9973       .99     .98    .96    .9545    .95    .90     .80   .6827 .50
     zc          3        2.58    2.33   2.05      2     1.96   1.645   1.28     1   .6745

Problem 5.10: When two players play 9-ball the probability that player-1 will win any
particular game is 0.52. These players play 120 games. What is the expected mean score
for player-1 and the expected variation about this mean score? What is the range of
scores that would be expected to occur 95% of the time? What is the range expected to
occur 50% of the time?
Answer: The possible game scores form a binomial distribution. The mean score for
player-1 is x =Np=120(0.52)=62.4. The standard deviation is
σ= Npq = 120(.52 )(.48 ) =5.47. For 120 games, the binomial distribution can be
approximated by a normal distribution. The critical value corresponding to 95% is
zc=1.96. zcσ=(1.96)(5.47)=10.7, so there is approximately a 95% probability that the
final game score for player-1 will be between x -zcσ=51 and x +zcσ=73. There is only
about a 5% chance that the final score will be outside of this range. For the 50% range,
zcσ=(.6745)(5.47)=3.69, so there is a 50% chance that the player-1 game score will be

                                                73
between 59 and 66 using the normal approximation to the binomial distribution. The
exact probability, using the exact binomial statistics as in P5.6, for this range of scores is
53.5%, which shows that the normal distribution approximation is quite reliable.

        Suppose that the probability p corresponds to some average probability of
successfully executing a shot, and runlength statistics are of interest, where “runlength”
means the number of consecutive successful shots. The chances of success on the first
shot is p, and for two consecutive successful shots is p2, and so on. The probability of
running n balls or greater is pn. What is the probability of running exactly n balls and
then missing? The answer is r n=pnq where q=(1-p). The set {rn} then defines a
probability distribution for a population of infinite size.

Problem 5.11: What is the mode, mean, and median runlength for a probability
distribution defined by rn=pnq as a function of p?
Answer: The ratio of two successive runlength probabilities, rn+1 /rn=p<1 shows that the
distribution is monotonically decreasing, and therefore the maximum of the distribution
occurs always at n=0, regardless of p. This shows that the mode is not particularly useful
for predicting typical outcomes if the distribution is severely skewed. The mean
runlength is
              ∞               ∞
        r=   ∑ nrn = (1− p )∑ npn
             n= 0             n=1
That is, a run of length n occurs with probability rn. It may be verified by straightforward
division that
                     ∞

                    ∑ pn = 1 + p + p2 +K+ pk +K
           1
                =
        (1 − p)
                    n=0
Differentiating both sides with respect to p , followed by multiplication by p, gives the
identity
                      ∞

                     ∑ np n = p + 2 p2 + 3p3 +K+kpk +K
            p
                 =
        (1 − p)2     n=1
Substitution of this relation into the expression for the mean runlength gives
                p      p
        r=           =
            (1− p) q
                r
        p=
             (r + 1)
The first equation gives the average runlength in terms of the individual shot probability,
whereas the second gives the individual shot probability as a function of the average
runlength.
        The median runlength is the smallest value m that satisfies the equation

                                              74
                      m                    m                 1− pm+1 
        1 ≤ r cum =
        2     m       ∑     rn = (1 − p)   ∑     pn = (1− p)
                                                             1− p 
                                                                       = 1− pm+1
                      n=0                  n=0
The summation identity is easily verified from the above expansion of 1/(1-p). Some
rearrangements then give the result that the median runlength corresponds to the smallest
integer m that satisfies the relation
                 log( 2) 
          m ≥ −          + 1
                 log( p ) 
It is interesting that the median runlength r˜ =m is always less than the mean runlength
r =p/(1-p), as demonstrated in the following table.

Table 5.2. Runlength statistics for selected shot probabilities p.
      p          r =p/(1-p) -(1+log(2)/log(p))        r˜                    r˜ / r
     0.5               1.0                   0.0              0            0.000
     0.6               1.5                   0.4              1            0.667
     0.7               2.3                   0.9              1            0.429
     0.8               4.0                   2.1              3            0.750
     0.9               9.0                   5.6              6            0.667
     0.91              10.1                  6.3              7            0.692
     0.92              11.5                  7.3              8            0.696
     0.93              13.3                  8.6              9            0.677
     0.94              15.7                  10.2             11           0.702
     0.95              19.0                  12.5             13           0.684
     0.96              24.0                  15.9             16           0.667
     0.97              32.3                  21.8             22           0.680
     0.98              49.0                  33.3             34           0.694
     0.99              99.0                  67.9             68           0.687

Problem 5.12: What is an approximate relation between the median and the mean
runlength for the rn distribution?
Answer: Using natural logarithms, the median runlength may be written
                                                  
                ln (2)               (   )
                                                + 1
                                     ln   2
        r˜ ≈ −         + 1 = −
                ln( p)          ln r          
                                  1 + r         
For reasonably large r , the denominator simplifies using the approximations
                            1 2
               = 1 − +   −K≈ 1 −
           r          1                       1
        1+r           r  r                  r
            r                   1 1  1 2 1  1 3    1
                   ≈ ln(1− ) = −   + 2   − 3   +K≈ −  
                          1
        ln 
             1+r         r        r      r        r        r
This gives the approximate relation

                                                      75
        r˜
           ≈ ln(2 ) = 0.693
        r
The last column of Table 5.2 shows the actual median to mean ratios for some selected
values of p. This approximation is seen to be accurate to within a few percent for mean
runlengths r of about 5.0 or larger.

Problem 5.13: An experienced 14.1 player knows that his mean runlength is 24.0 balls.
What is the shot probability using the r n estimate of the statistical distribution? What is
the probability that this player will run between 50 and 75 balls? What is the probability
of a run 100 or larger?
Answer: The individual shot probability for this player is p=24.0/25.0=.96. The
                                                         cum
probability of a run between 50 and 75, inclusive, is r75    − rcum         76
                                                                 49 =(1-p )-(1-p )=
                                                                                    50

p50-p76=0.085. That is, the player should expect a run between 50 and 75 to occur in
8.5% of the attempts. The probability of a run of 100 or over is 1 − rcum 99 =p
                                                                                 100=0.017;

such a run will occur in 1.7% of the attempts.

Problem 5.14: This same 14.1 player is offered a friendly wager that for the rest of the
day, every run over 20 balls he will win the wager amount, and every run of 20 balls or
less he will lose the wager amount. Using the above statistical runlength model, is this a
good proposition for the player?
Answer: Since his 24.0 mean is over 20 balls, it might seem at first that it would be a
good proposition. However, upon closer inspection, the wager is really a matter of the
median runlength, not the mean runlength. The individual shot probability for this player
is p=24.0/25.0=.96, and this corresponds to a median runlength of r˜ =16 according to
Table 5.2. The approximation from P5.12 gives r˜ ≈(0.693)(24.0)=16.6, so even if the
player did not have the benefit of the table or a calculator to compute the exact median,
he should expect to run 20 balls less than half of the time. Computation of the exact
                                          cum
cumulative probability for m=20 gives r20      = 1 − 0.96 21 = 0.576 , which means that he
should expect to lose the wager 57.6% of the time, and win it only 42.4% of the time
using the simple statistical model.
        As shown in the following problem, safety play between opponents in an actual
game situation skews the differences between the mean and the median runlengths even
more than that predicted by this simple statistical model.

Problem 5.15: Assume that due to safety play by the opponent, the first shot of a player’s
inning has a success probability of only αp, with 0<α≤1, and each subsequent shot then
has a success probability of p. What is the runlength probability distribution, the mean,
the median, and the approximate ratio of the median to the mean as a function of α and p?
Answer: r(α) 0=(1-αp), r(α) 1=αpq, and, in general, r(α) n=αpnq for n>0. Using the same

                                             76
approach as in P5.11, the mean runlength is found to be
                 p
        r( ) =
               1− p
The cumulative probabilities are given by
        r( )cum          m+1
            m = 1− p
and the median runlength is determined by the smallest integer m that satisfies the
equations
        r( )cum          m+1 1
            m = 1− p         ≥2
              log(2 ) 
        m ≥ −          + 1
              log ( p)    
The approximate ratio of the median to the mean, using the same approximations as in
P5.12, is given by
        r˜ ( ) ln(2 )
                 ≈
        r( )
A few sample values for this ratio are shown in the following table.
                  α        1.0    0.9    0.8      0.7    0.6     0.5
            r˜ ( ) r ( )  0.69 0.65 0.59 0.48 0.30               0.0
Only in the best possible case, α=1, is this ratio as good as that predicted in P5.12; in the
other cases, this ratio becomes progressively worse with more aggressive safety play.
(Note that in all of the equations above, setting α=1 produces agreement with the
previous results.) This shows that even though the mean runlength is strongly dependent
on safety play, the median runlength is even more sensitive.

       The previous discussion concerned runlengths in which there were n successes
followed by a single miss. In a game situation, this would apply to a single inning of a
longer game. What is the runlength distribution after several innings? Using a similar
approach as before, it is seen that the probability of accumulating n successful shots and
m misses out of N=m+n total shots is the binomial expansion term P(p;n,m). The
probability of a runlength score of exactly n after m innings (neglecting penalty points
that might apply to the misses in the game) is given by
                                  n + m −1
        Rnm = qP ( p;n,m − 1) =  m − 1  pn qm

That is, the first (m-1) misses can occur anywhere during the first (n+m-1) shots, but the
last miss must occur on the last shot. It may be verified that Rn1=rn for all n, which is the
single-inning runlength distribution that has been previously examined.

Problem 5.16: What is the mean score after m innings, using the Rnm distribution, as a
function of p? What is the standard deviation of these scores?
Answer: The mean score is

                                             77
               ∞                 ∞                                ∞
                                                                        ( n + m − 1)! pn
        Rm =   ∑   nRnm = ∑           n n +mm − 1 n m
                                              −1  p q = q
                                                           m
                                                                 ∑   ( n − 1)!(m − 1)!
               n=0        n=0                                    n=1
                         ∞                            ∞
                               (n + m )! n
                        ∑                            ∑
                                                                               m
                    m                                        n + m pn = mpq
            = mpq                        p = mpqm            m 
                               (n)!( m)!                                 (1− p)m+1
                        n= 0                         n= 0
                     p
            =m           = mr
                  (1− p)
The summation identity used in the above sequence may be verified using induction and
repeated differentiation of the 1/(1-p) expansion as in P5.11. This result says simply that
if a player has a mean, single-inning, runlength of r , then after m innings, his mean score
will be m r .
        The variance and standard deviation of the scores are
                ∞                          ∞
          2 =
          m    ∑
                n=0
                     n Rnm  − Rm = −Rm +
                       2

                           
                                 2       2
                                                   ∑
                                                (n( n − 1) + n) Rnm
                                            n=0
                                 ∞                                                 ∞
            = Rm − Rm2 +        ∑     n( n − 1)Rnm = Rm − Rm2 + m( m + 1) p2 qm   ∑ (nn!+(mm++11))!! pn
                                n=0                                               n=0
                                m(m + 1) p 2 mp     mp
            = Rm − Rm2 +                    = 2 =
                                   q 2       q    (1− p)2
                   2           mp    mp
         m =       m =            =
                               q    1− p

        There are significant qualitative differences in the R nm distributions (for a given
inning count m) and the single-inning rn distribution, particularly for large m. The most
obvious of these is that the mode (or peak) of Rnm may occur for a nonzero value, as may
be verified by inspection of a few examples; in contrast, the single-inning rn distribution
always peaks at n=0. The ratio of two successive probability values is
         Rn+1,m  n + m 
                 =         p
          Rn,m       n +1 
The first factor is nonincreasing and approaches one from above as n increases, the
second factor p is less than one, and the product may be either larger than one, indicating
that the distribution is increasing towards a peak, or less than one, indicating that the
distribution is decreasing after the peak. The mode is determined by the smallest
nonnegative value of n for which the ratio is less than one, or zero if the ratio is always
less than one. Solving the above ratio for this value gives the relation
                           mp − 1                 1
         Mode = Ceiling            = Ceiling  Rm −
                           1− p                   q

                                                     78
The closed-form expression for the multiple-inning median involves special function
evaluations (namely, the incomplete beta function), but it is easily determined by
inspection of the numerical cumulative distributions for a given shot probability p and for
a given value of the inning count m. The following table gives some examples of these
statistical parameters for selected values of m and p.

       Table 5.3. Multiple-Inning Runlength Statistics
                     Mode                          Rm                             R˜ m
         p\m   1   2 4 8       16       1      2      4      8      16   1    2    4      8    16
          .5   0   0 2 6       14     1.0    2.0    4.0    8.0    16.0   0    1    3      7    15
          .6   0   1 4 10      22     1.5    3.0    6.0   12.0    24.0   1    2    5     11    23
          .7   0   2 6 16      34     2.3    4.7    9.3   18.7    37.3   1    4    8     18    36
          .8   0   3 11 27     59     4.0    8.0   16.0   32.0    64.0   3    7   15     31    63
          .9   0   8 26 62    134     9.0   18.0   36.0   72.0   144.0   6   15   33     69   141

Because the median has no simple closed-form expression, as do the mode and the mean,
a useful empirical approximation of the median is given by the weighted average
        R˜ m = 13 (2Rm + Mode) ≈ Rm − 1 (3q )
Comparison of this estimate with the above exact values in Table 5.3 shows that it is
fairly accurate for m=4 or greater. Note that apart from the integer truncation in the mode
and median evaluations, the differences between the mean, median, and the mode depend
only on the individual shot probability p and are independent of the inning count m. This
is why the three statistics appear to merge together in a relative sense in Table 5.3; they
all increase with the inning count m but with constant differences.
        When the multiple-inning runlength mean and the mode are relatively close to
each other, indicating little skew, and the distribution has a single peak that is not close to
zero, then the distribution is well approximated by a normal distribution with mean and
standard deviation as determined in P5.16. That is, even though the single-inning
distribution appears very different than a normal distribution, the multiple-inning
distributions approach nonetheless a normal form as the inning count m increases. A
perhaps simpler example of this common phenomenon is the point totals for two fair
dice; each die individually has a flat distribution of point values from one to six, but when
the totals are added for two dice, the probability of totaling to seven (p 7=1⁄6), which is the
mean, is six times larger than rolling a two (p2=1⁄36), with the other possible totals having
intermediate probabilities. The results from P5.16 show that although the standard
deviation of the score distributions are increasing with the inning count m, the deviation
increases only as m , whereas the mean score increases linearly as m. This means that
the relative deviations (also called the relative dispersions), given by m Rm = 1 mp ,
decrease with respect to increasing inning count. When viewed in terms of percentages,
the score will appear to more tightly cluster with larger inning counts, but when viewed

                                              79
in terms of actual score points, the score will appear to disperse more with larger inning
counts; this is demonstrated in the following problem.

Problem 5.17: The 14.1 player from P5.13 plays 5 innings. What is his mean score, most
likely score, and his median score? What is the standard deviation of the expected score
distribution? What are these parameters after 50 innings?
Answer: This player’s mean single-inning runlength is r =24.0, so his shot probability is
p=0.96. After 5 innings, the mean score is given by
         R5 = mr = 5(24.0) = 120.0
His most likely score is the distribution peak, or the mode, given by
         Mode = Ceiling ( Rm − 1 q) = Ceiling (120.0 − 25.0) = 95
The median is estimated as
      R˜5 = 13 (2 R5 + Mode ) ≈ R5 − 1 (3q) = R5 − 25.0 / 3 = 112
This shows that the distribution of scores after 5 innings still is skewed significantly to
the right. The standard deviation after 5 innings is
          5 = mp q = 5(.96 ) .04 = 54.8
and the relative deviation is 5 R5 = 54.8 120.0 = 0.457 , which is quite large.
        If the player were to wager a fixed amount per point on the score after 5 innings,
then the 120 point score demarks the fair betting point; those betting against the player at
a lower score should expect to lose. But if someone were to wager in a betting pool of all
possible scores, then a score of 95 is the most likely winner, and the scores close to 95
would be the best alternatives. And finally if the player were to wager simply whether
the score is beyond a certain value after 5 innings (as in P5.14), then the 112 point score
demarks the fair betting point; those betting against the player at a lower score should
expect to lose.
        For 50 innings the statistical parameters are: R50 =1200, Mode=1175, R˜50 =1192,
σ50=173, and σ50/ R50 =0.144. This distribution is only slightly skewed to the right, and
although the standard deviation is larger for 50 innings than for 5 innings, the relative
deviation compared to the mean is much smaller.

        In most of the previous discussion, the population distribution and statistical
parameters have been assumed to be known, and the questions have been about the
properties of various samples of this population. The reverse situation is now examined,
namely how to predict the total population statistics from known sample statistics. For
this purpose, consider a population from which all possible subsets of a particular size are
formed. Each of these subsets has a mean, and the questions of interest are how reliable
of an estimate for the total population mean is one of these subset means, how does this
estimate depend on the standard deviation of the population, and how does this estimate
improve with increasing sample size.

                                             80
        Assume that there is some population {xi} that has a mean x p and a standard
deviation σp. To simplify the following steps, it is assumed that the population is finite
of size N, but the final results will also hold for infinite populations. Now suppose that
m-element subsets are drawn with replacement from the population. There are Nm
possible m-element subsets, and β is used as an index symbol to enumerate them. Such
m-element sets are called cartesian product sets. The mean of each of these subsets is
                   m

                 ∑ x (i, )
            1
        x =
            m
                   i =1
where τ(i,β) is the population index of the i-th element of the β-th subset. The mean and
variance of these m-element subset means is given by
                          Nm

                          ∑x
               1
        x[m] = m
              N
                           =1
                              Nm

                              ∑ x2 − x[m]
                   1
          [x ]2m = m                  2
                  N
                                =1
       For m=1, there are N 1-element subsets, and the mean of each of these subsets is
simply the value of that element, x = x (i, ) = xi , and the mean of the subset means is
the same as the population mean.
                     N

                   ∑x = xp
               1
        x[1] =
               N
                     =1
Similarly, the variance of these subset means is the same as the population variance.
                          N

                     ∑
                   1
          [x ]12 =     x 2 − x[1]
                               2
                                  = 2p
                   N
                           =1
Now consider the situation in which the m-element subset parameters x[m] and [x ]2m
are assumed to be available. The (m+1)-element subsets are constructed by forming the
cartesian products {xi ⊗ x ;i = 1…N, = 1…N m }. That is, each of the new set members
is formed by combining the N population set elements with all possible N m m-element
subsets. The mean of each of these new subsets is
                   x i + mx
        x ′ = xi =
                      m+1
The mean of these subset means is
                                N m +1                         Nm N
                                                                                  x + mx
                                 ∑                             ∑ ∑ ( xi + mx ) = p(m + 1)[m]
                          1                           1
        x[m+1] =                         x ′=
                    N m+1                       (m + 1)N m+1
                                     ′ =1                       =1 i =1
This relation gives the results x [2]= x p, x [3]= x p, and, in general,

                                                         81
         x [m]= x p
for all subset sizes m. The variance of the subset means is
                                 Nm N

                                 ∑ ∑ xi2 − x[m+1]
                           1
         [x ]2m+1 =                          2
                           m+1
                       N
                                  =1 i =1
                                 Nm N

                                 ∑ ∑ ( m +1 1)2 ( xi2 + 2mxi x + m2 x 2 ) − x 2p
                           1
                   =       m+1
                       N
                                  =1 i =1
                                    N                   Nm          
                                            ∑                     ∑
                        1          1                      1
                   =                  x − x p  + m  m
                                         2    2      2           2    2
                                                                x − x p  
                     (m + 1)2   N i=1 i             N
                                                             =1         
                           2 + m2
                           p         [x ]2m
                   =
                            ( m + 1)2
This relation gives the results σ[ x ]22=σp2/2, σ[ x ]32=σp2/3, and, in general,
σ[ x ]m2=σp2/m. The standard deviation of the subset means is then given by
                       p
         [x ]m =
                    m
That is, the distribution of subset means becomes more narrowly peaked about the
population mean as the size of the subset becomes larger. This relation also says that if
the population standard deviation is small, then the mean estimates obtained from the
subsets will be similarly sharp. In practice, the population standard deviation is usually
not known, so it must be estimated from the m-element subspace statistics, along with the
estimate of the mean.
        When the subsets are formed by selection from the population without
replacement, then the mean of the subset means is also given by
         x [m]= x p
and the standard deviation of the subset means is given by
                     p N −m
           [x ]m =
                    m N −1
The standard deviation of the means of the subsets formed without replacement are
always smaller than those with replacement, and in particular σ[ x ]m=0 when m=N.
When N>>m, then the standard deviation of the mean is essentially the same for both
types of subsets, and in the limit of an infinite population, both expressions are seen to be
formally equivalent.
        When the standard deviation is computed for an m-element sample space, then it
is customary to use the factor (m-1) rather than m in the denominator; this has the effect
of making the estimate for the population standard deviation slightly larger, but for
reasonably large sample sizes the difference is unimportant. There are also other
corrections that are sometimes applied when estimating population statistics from sample

                                                    82
spaces. With the knowledge that such corrections can lead to slightly better estimations,
they will not be used in the following examples for the sake of simplicity.

Problem 5.18: A population space has the values {1,2,4,5} which occur with equal
probabilities. Compute the mean and standard deviation of the population set. Compute
the mean and the standard deviation of the mean of the 2-element cartesian product set.
Answer: The population space mean is 3.0, and the population standard deviation is
σp=sqrt(5/2)=1.5811. The 2-element cartesian product set is the same as the 2-element
subsets drawn with replacement from the original set. There are 16 of these 2-element
subsets, all with equal probability,
                 {1,1} {1,2} {1,4} {1,5}
                 {2,1} {2,2} {2,4} {2,5}
                 {4,1} {4,2} {4,4} {4,5}
                 {5,1} {5,2} {5,4} {5,5}
and with the corresponding means
                 1.0     1.5     2.5    3.0
                 1.5     2.0     3.0    3.5
                 2.5     3.0     4.0    4.5
                 3.0     3.5     4.5    5.0
The mean of these 2-element subset means is x [2]3.0, which demonstrates the general
relation x [m]= x p. The standard deviation of these subspace means is σ[ x ]2=1.1180,
which agrees with the equation σ[ x ]2=σp/sqrt(2). Note that these computations apply to
a 4-element population space, or to a larger finite population space with the appropriate
repetitions, or to an infinite population space with the appropriate probabilities.

Problem 5.19: A player has a practice routine that involves a particular sequence of
shots. He keeps track of his numerical score for this routine for 10 weeks with the
following results: {50, 44, 46, 52, 47, 51, 49, 45, 48, 50}. What is his mean score?
Assuming a normal distribution of scores, what is the range of scores for which there is
an 80% confidence level that the range includes the player’s true mean score for this
practice drill? The player experiments with a new technique (e.g. a different stroke
technique) and scores a 53 on this drill, his highest score ever. Can the player be 95%
certain that this is due to the technique change rather than to random chance? Can he be
90% certain that the score is due to the technique change? How does the sample size
affect these assessments?
Answer: The mean score for the 10 weeks is 48.2. The standard deviation of the sample
set is σ=2.52, which is taken as an approximation of the population standard deviation.
The standard deviation of the mean is estimated as σ[ x ]10=σ/Sqrt(10)=0.797. Using the
normal distribution approximation, Table 5.1 gives the critical value for an 80%
confidence level as z c=1.28. There is an 80% chance that the true mean score, which

                                            83
would be the long-term mean of the player’s score for this drill, is between
 x -zcσ[ x ]=47.2 and x +zcσ[ x ]=49.2.
         The score of 53 is 4.8 points higher than the mean, or 4.8/2.52=1.90 standard
units. The critical value for 95% confidence is z c=1.96, so such a score would be
expected to occur even with no change in stroke technique due to random chance within
the 95% confidence predicted by a normal distribution assumption. For a 90%
confidence zc=1.645; such a score would not be expected to occur at this confidence level
due simply to random chance. If the estimates for the mean and standard deviation were
reliable (e.g. if the sample were much larger), then the player could say that he is 90%
certain that the stroke technique change improved his score, but he could not say that he
is 95% certain. However, this is a fairly small difference based on such a small sample.
There is, after all, a good chance that the true mean is as high as 49.2, so a score of 53 is
only 3.8 points, or 3.8/2.52=1.51 standard units, above the mean, and such a score can be
expected to occur about 87% of the time due to random chance; that is, the player could
say only that he is 13% confident that the score is due to the stroke change. Additional
scores with the original technique would allow for a more accurate estimation of the
population mean, and therefore a more accurate estimation of the effect of the stroke
change in terms of standard units. This is one reason why players should establish
practice routines and record their numerical scores over long periods of time; not only
does it allow the player to track his progress, but it also allows for accurate statistical
assessments of technique and equipment changes.
         More exact determinations of the confidence can be achieved with additional data,
including those obtained using the new stroke technique, by comparing the means and
standard deviations of the different data sets (original stroke technique vs. the new one).
When the means are sufficiently different, and when the standard deviations are
sufficiently narrow, then there is a high confidence that the technique change is
responsible for the score difference rather than simply the expected random fluctuations
in the score. In general, the confidence is determined by the overlap regions of the two
distribution tails. This type of comparative analysis can be quantified further with chi-
squared tests (to compare expected and measured distribution statistics), the Student’s t-
test (to determine if two samples with the same variance have different means), the F-
Test (to compare sample variances), and with Analysis of Variance techniques (to
determine if two different samples actually are drawn from the same population). These
methods are all outside the scope of this section, but they are mentioned in case the
interested reader wishes to follow up on this interesting topic.

       Statistical analysis can be used as a basis of choosing from among a set of
possible tactics. This requires estimations of individual shot outcomes. A simple
example of using probabilities to assess tactical options is a simple “one-ball” game,
which occurs in actual game situations when, for example, both players are shooting at

                                             84
the 9-ball in a game of 9-ball, or when both players are shooting at the 8-ball in a game of
8-ball, or when both players are shooting at the black in a game of snooker, or when both
players are shooting at the last ball in a game of one-pocket. In the one-ball game, a
player is faced with a particular shot at a single ball. If he succeeds, then he wins
immediately, and if he fails then the outcome depends on the outcome of the opponent’s
shot. As a way of keeping track of the details, such game situations may be represented
with a diagram. The diagram corresponding to the one-ball game is shown in Fig. 5.2.

       Fig. 5.2. In the game diagram for the simple one-ball game, there are an
       infinite number of nodes. Only the first few are shown explicitly. Player-
       1 wins at the terminal nodes Wn and he loses at the terminal nodes Ln .
       The transition probabilities are next to the connecting arcs.

In this diagram, the various states (or game situations) are called nodes and are shown by
the circles. The possible state transitions are shown by the lines the connecting the nodes,
and these lines are called arcs. The states labeled by Sn are where the winning ball has
not been pocketed by the nth inning, the states labeled by Wn are those where player-1
has won on the nth inning, and the states labeled by Ln are those where player-1 has lost
on the nth inning. Each arc is associated with a particular transition probability. There
are probability weights associated with each state. S1 is called the graph head, and P S1=1
means that the S1 node is the starting point of the game. The weight of any other state is
given by the sum of the weights of the previously connected state multiplied by the
transition probability associated with the connecting arc. That is, the probability of
arriving at a particular state in the game is the summation of the probability of arriving at
all previous states, times the probability of making a transition from these previous states
to the current state. The states labeled Wn and Ln are called terminal nodes, or
probability sinks, or tails, since there are no arcs leaving these nodes; the game is over
when the destination is one of these nodes. These game diagrams are a pictorial way of
enumerating all possible paths as the probability density flows from the sources, through
the transient states, to the probability sinks.
        In the simple one-ball game depicted in Fig. 5.2, there is only one probability
source S1, an infinite number of transient states Sn, and an infinite number of probability
sinks Wn and Ln. There are only two arcs leaving each of the Sn nodes; in more
complicated game situations, there may be several arcs leaving a node, each depicting a
transition to a new possible state or to a previous state. The sum of all of the arc
transition probabilities from a node is 1. In Fig. 5.2, the successful shots by either player
are labeled pn and the unsuccessful shots are labeled qn with qn=(1-pn). This general idea
of assigning probability weights to nodes, and to computing these weights from transition

                                             85
probabilities has already been used in the recursive algorithm for computing game score
probabilities in P5.6.
        In the general one-ball game, all of the individual p n values will be different. It is
interesting to consider some simpler cases in which the shot success probabilities are
assumed to have special relations.

Problem 5.20: Assume that all of the shots taken by player-1 in the game depicted in Fig.
5.2 have a success probability of p 1, and all of the shots taken by player-2 have a success
probability of p2. In terms of these two parameters, what is player-1’s total probability of
winning, assuming that an infinite number of shots is allowed in the game? What
combinations of p1 and p2 lead to a game probability of W=1⁄2?
Answer: The total chance of winning is the summation of the node weights P W1, PW3,….
By multiplying the appropriate arc weights to get the node weights, the probabilities are
given by PW1=p1, PW3=q1q2p1, PW5=(q1q2)2p1, and so on. This will be called the two-
parameter infinite-look-ahead approximation to the general one-ball game. The
summation is
       W [∞] = PW1 + PW 3 + PW5 +K= p1 + q1q2 p1 + (q1q2 ) p1 +K
                                                                2

                   ∞              ∞
              =   ∑ PW(2i −1) = ∑ ( q1q2 )i p1 = 1− pq11q2 = 1 + p 1(1− p1)
                  i =1           i =0                             2
                                                                       p1
Setting W[∞]=1⁄2 and solving for p2 in terms of p1 gives
                   p1
        p2crit =
                 (1− p1 )
When the actual value of p2 is larger than this critical value, player-2 is expected to win,
and when p2 is smaller than this critical value then player-1 is expected to win.

        A contour plot of W[∞] as a function of the two parameters p 1 and p2 is shown in
Fig. 5.3. The region of the contour plot corresponding to small p1 and large p2 is the
“sell-out” region; shots in this region should usually be avoided and other shots should be
considered. The area of the contour plot corresponding to large p 1 and small p2 is the “2-
way shot” region; it is a great tactical advantage when these shots are available, as
indicated by the large W [∞] values. The area of the contour plot with small p 1 and small
p2 corresponds to defensive safety shots; the primary purpose is to keep the opponent
from winning immediately, and to exploit any small advantage in probability over several
innings. It is interesting to note how sensitive is the game probability estimate W[∞] to
small changes in the shot probabilities p 1 and p2 in this region.

                                              86
                                W[ ∞ ]                                                        W[ 2 ]
         1        0.1
                                                                       1
                        0.2                                                    0.1
                           0.3                                                   0.2
        0.8                   0.4                                  0.8                 0.3
                                0.5                                                       0.4
                                  0.6                                                        0.5
                                                                                                   0.6
        0.6                              0.7                       0.6                                   0.7
                                               0.8 0.9                                                         0.8
   p2                                                             p2                                                 0.9
        0.4                                                        0.4

        0.2                                                        0.2

         0                                                             0
              0         0.2   0.4        0.6      0.8    1                 0      0.2       0.4        0.6      0.8        1
                                    p1                                                            p1

          Fig. 5.3. Contour plots of the W[∞] and W[2] approximations to the general
          one-ball game as a function of the two independent parameters p1 and p2.
          The W=1⁄2 contours are the same for both approximations.

         A particularly important set of values corresponds to W[∞]=1⁄2. The p1 and p2
combinations for which W[∞]>1⁄2 are those in which player-1 is expected to win the
simple one-ball game, and those values for which W[∞]<1⁄2 are those in which player-1 is
expected to lose. In this simple game model, p 2 will be large either when player-2 is a
very good shotmaker, or when the balls end up consistently in easy positions after a miss
by player-1. It is clear from this graph that W [∞]>1⁄2 for all values of p 2 when p1>1⁄2; this
means that no matter how good of a shotmaker the opponent is, or how easy of a shot is
left after each miss, player-1 is the expected winner when p 1>1⁄2. This is supported also
by the p2crit expression given in P5.20. This advantage is afforded player-1 because he
gets the first shot in the game. However, it is still useful to compare two possible
strategies, even when both of them result in favorable outcomes for player-1. When
p1<1⁄2, then the expected outcome clearly depends on p2; when p2 is sufficiently small,
then player-1 is still the expected winner, but when p 2 is large, then player-1 is expected
to lose.

Problem 5.21: Assume that player-1 in the one-ball game takes his first shot with a
success probability of p 1, and that a good estimate of the value of p2 is known, but after
these first two shots both players are assumed to have an even chance of winning the
game. In terms of these two parameters, what is player-1’s total probability of winning?
What combinations of p 1 and p2 lead to a game probability of W=1⁄2?
Answer: The game diagram for this approximation to the general one-ball game is shown
in Fig. 5.4. This will be called the two-parameter two-shot-look-ahead approximation.
There are now only two nodes in Fig. 5.4 that correspond to wins for player-1. The game

                                                             87
probability is the sum of the weights for these two nodes.
       W [2] = PW1 + PW = p1 + 12 q1q2
A contour plot of W[2] is shown in Fig. 5.3. When compared to the W [∞] contour plot, it
is seen that the two approximations give similar, but not exactly equivalent, predictions of
game probabilities.
        Rearranging the W[2]=1⁄2 equation to solve for p2 as a function of p1 gives
                    p1
         p2crit =
                  (1− p1 )
which is the same curve of critical values as determined previously for W[∞].

       Fig. 5.4. The two-shot-look-ahead approximation to the general one-ball
       game depends on only two independent parameters p1 and p2 that
       characterize the shot success for the first two innings. After the second
       inning, the game outcome probability is split equally between the two
       players.

        If three independent shot parameters are known, then this leads to a three-shot-
look-ahead approximation, and in general there are n-shot-look-ahead approximations
involving n independent probability parameters. It should be stressed that both the two-
parameter infinite-look-ahead and the two-parameter two-shot-look-ahead equations are
approximations to the general one-ball game; one of these should not be regarded as an
approximation to the other. In some situations, the infinite-look-ahead assumption may
be more appropriate, while in other situations the two-shot-look-ahead assumption might
be best. For example, if player-1 is a weaker player than player-2, then from a relatively
neutral position the infinite-look-ahead model with a large p2 value would provide the
most reliable estimates of game outcomes; but if both players are roughly equal in ability,
and if player-1 has a decided positional advantage for his first shot (e.g. a strong 2-way
shot corresponding to a large p1 and a small p2), then the two-shot-look-ahead model
would provide the most reliable estimates of game outcomes.
        If two players are playing a multigame 9-ball match (or, for example, 8-ball or
one-pocket), then the opening break shot is usually regarded as an advantage. Matches
are sometimes played in which the winner of each game is rewarded by being allowed the
opening break in the next game (winner-breaks), or they may be played where the loser
of one game breaks in the next game (loser-breaks), or the players may alternate breaks
from game to game, or one of the players may break all of the games (e.g. player-1

                                            88
breaks; this is usually regarded as a handicap advantage for the breaking player to
compensate for some difference in skills). This last situation is interesting in the context
of the above analysis of the one-ball game. Suppose that player-1 breaks each game, and
that he wins each of these games on his first inning with a probability of p 1. In the
second inning, player-2 wins with a probability of p2, and so on. The game diagram for
this situation is the same as for the one-ball game. The nodes of the diagram correspond
to inning counts rather than individual shots, and the winning probabilities are with
respect to games rather than individual shot successes, but the mathematical structure is
the same for both situations. The infinite-look-ahead and the two-shot-look-ahead
approximations, and the discussions of these two parameters in P5.20 and P5.21 apply
also, in a perhaps more approximate way, to this multigame match situation. With these
approximations, the contour plots in Fig. 5.3 show that player-1 would be expected to
have an advantage over player-2 by virtue of playing the first inning, and this advantage
becomes more significant for larger values p1.

Problem 5.7: Using the game probability estimates W[∞] and W[2], compute the
probability for player-1 to win when (p1,p2) have the values: (0.1,0.9), (0.9,0.1), (0.9,0.9),
(0.5,0.5), (0.25,0.33), (0.4,0.8), and (0.3,0.3).
Answer: The game probability estimates are given in the following table
               p1              p2             W[∞]        W[2]
              0.1            0.9             0.11            0.15
              0.9            0.1             0.99            0.95
              0.9            0.9             0.90            0.90
              0.5            0.5             0.67            0.62
              0.25           0.33            0.50            0.50
              0.4            0.8             0.45            0.46
              0.3            0.3             0.59            0.55
The (p1,p2)=(0.1,0.9) shot is a sell-out shot. Player-1 is expected to lose this game, even
with the first-shot advantage; he should consider another choice of shot. The (0.9,0.1)
situation is a strong 2-way shot; player-1 is the favorite in this game. For (0.9,0.9),
player-1 is again the favorite. Even though p1 for this case is the same as the previous
one, it is clear that it is better to plan to leave a low-percentage shot for the opponent than
a high-percentage one (i.e., W [∞]=0.99 is better than W[∞]=0.90). For the (0.5,0.5) shot,
player-1 is the expected game winner using both estimates, even though he and his
opponent are evenly matched with equally difficult shots; this is due to the first-shot
advantage. The (0.25,0.33) shot corresponds to a (p1,p2crit) pair, so each player has equal
probability of winning according to both estimates.
         Player-1 has a disadvantage at (0.4,0.8) and a fairly significant advantage at
(0.3,0.3) using both estimates of the game probability. It is interesting to compare these
last two situations, since it appears to be a paradox to many inexperienced pool players.
In both cases, the individual shot probability p 1 is relatively small. In fact, p1 is smaller

                                              89
for the second (favorable) game outcome than for the first (unfavorable) game outcome.
In the first case, he leaves a high-probability shot for his opponent, while in the second
case he leaves a low-probability shot. Inexperienced players often choose shots based
only on their estimate of the first-shot success probability, that is only on p1. This is an
example of how the down-side consequences (what occurs after the miss) outweigh the
up-side reward (which shot has the higher p1). In other words, it is sometimes more
important not to “sell out” than it is to try to succeed with a spectacular shot. In “tactic-
rich” games involving relatively difficult shots, such as one-pocket, this kind of decision
is part of the routine shot-selection process. The simple one-ball game mathematical
model used here provides an approximate way to quantify the relative importance of the
up-side reward and the down-side consequences for these more complex situations in
actual pool games.

        In physical simulations, processes that may be characterized by probabilities are
called stochastic systems, and an important class of stochastic systems, called Markov
processes, are those in which the probability of making a transition from one state to
another depends only on the initial and final states, and not upon a history of the previous
states. The game diagrams described above are examples of Markov processes. One way
to analyze these types of diagrams is to consider them as a “time dependent” process. In
some situations, it is the transient short-time behavior that is of importance, and at other
times it is the long-time steady-state behavior that is most interesting. In the above game
diagrams, the “time” parameter corresponds to the inning count, or to the shot count, or,
as will be discussed below, to a game count. An initial probability distribution is
assigned to the nodes of the graph, and this probability density flows through the graph as
individual time steps are taken. The information that is most important in the pool-game
situation is how much of this probability density ends up in the various terminal nodes.
In the above examples of game diagrams, it was possible to answer this question by
recognizing relatively simple algebraic simplifications that allowed closed-form
expressions to be obtained. But in more complicated situations, such closed-form
expressions may not be apparent, or they may not even exist. In these situations, it is still
possible to extract the long-time steady state probability densities numerically, and this
general procedure is now discussed.

       Fig. 5.5. The game diagram for the two-parameter infinite look-ahead
       approximation to the general one-ball game consists of four nodes: two
       terminal nodes and two transition nodes.

                                              90
        This procedure will be applied first to the one-ball game so that the results can be
compared to those previously found. The two-parameter infinite look-ahead game
probability will be examined. For this purpose, it is convenient to use a simpler game
diagram, shown in Fig. 5.5, that has only a finite number of nodes (four in this case). In
this diagram, all of the wins for player-1 are treated equivalently, with a single terminal
node, and likewise all loses for player-1 are treated with a single terminal node. The two
transient states are related simply to which player is shooting the shot. The important
quantity in Markov analysis is the probability transition matrix. The rows and columns
of this matrix correspond to the states of the system, and therefore to the nodes of the
game diagram. The element Mij corresponds to the arc weight of the arc that connects
node j to node i; that is Mij is the probability of making a transition from the state
corresponding to node j to the state corresponding to node i. Nodes that are not
connected correspond to zero Mij values. Terminal nodes are assumed to make
transitions to themselves each time step with unit probability. The transition matrix
corresponding to the two-parameter infinite-look-ahead approximation to the one-ball
game is
               1 p1 0 0
                0 0 q2 0
        M = 0 q
                   1    0 0
               0 0 p2 1
The rows and columns of the matrix correspond to the nodes W, S1, S2, and L,
respectively. The sum of the elements in a column of M is one, which reflects the fact
that probability density is not destroyed by taking a time step. The vector-matrix product
relation (1,1,1,1)M=(1,1,1,1) is a consequence of this, and such a relation is always
satisfied for a Markov transition matrix. This means that there exists at least one left
eigenvector of M that corresponds to an eigenvalue of one, and therefore there also must
exist a right eigenvector with this same eigenvalue; the existence of this unit eigenvalue
is important in this analysis. Let ˚=(1,1,1,1) be this left eigenvector and v0 be an
arbitrary column vector, then the dot product ˚v0 is equal to the sum of the elements of
v0. The vectors of interest correspond to probability densities, and such vectors contain
only nonnegative elements that sum to one. A single time-propagation step from an
initial vector v0 is given by the matrix-vector product v1=Mv0. Operating on the left of
this equation with ˚ gives the result ˚v1=˚v0=1, which means that the sum of the
probability density after the time step is the same as the sum before the time step. After
two steps, the density is given by v2=Mv1=M2v0, and after n steps the density is given by
vn=Mv(n-1)=Mnv0. Operating on the left by ˚ on any of these relations shows that the
total density is conserved always by the propagation operations.
         What does the vector v n look like after a large number of steps? The answer
depends on the eigenvalues of the matrix M. In general the right eigenvectors of M
satisfy the equation MR=R¬ in which the right eigenvectors form the columns of R, and
the diagonal matrix ¬ contains the corresponding eigenvalues. This allows the matrix M

                                             91
to be written as M=R¬R-1. The matrix M2 is given by M2=R¬R-1R¬R-1=R¬ 2R-1, and
in general Mn=R¬ nR-1 with
               n 0    0   0
                 1
              0    n  0   0
                    2
       ¬n = 
              0   0    n
                        3  0 
              0   0   0    n
                            4
This expression allows the probability distribution after an arbitrary number of time steps
to be determined with relatively little effort, compared to the straightforward approach
using repeated multiplications. The rows of the matrix L=R-1 are the left eigenvectors,
and, with the appropriate choice of normalization, one of these rows is ˚=L[1]. If ¬ i=1,
then ¬in=1 for all n, and if |¬i|<1, then ¬in→0 as n→∞. For the transition matrices
associated with game diagrams, the eigenvalues are -1<¬i≤1. This allows the vector limit
after an infinite number of time steps, called the stochastic limit, to be written as
                                                  ( i =1)
       v∞ = M∞v0 = R¬ ∞R-1v0 = R¬ ∞Lv0 =           ∑ Ri (Liv 0 )
                                                     i
in which the summation includes only the right and left eigenvector pairs that correspond
to eigenvalues of unit magnitude. In many cases, there is only a single eigenvalue in this
summation, and in this case v∞=R1(˚v0)=R1, where R1 is the right eigenvector
associated with the single eigenvalue of unit magnitude (and scaled appropriately to
conserve density). In this case there is a single stochastic limit v∞ that is approached for
any arbitrary starting density v0. In other cases, there may be more than one such vector
in the summation, in which case the final stable probability distribution depends on the
starting distribution v0. It may be verified that M∞M∞=M∞, and therefore M∞ is a
projection operator; it operates upon an arbitrary probability density distribution and
projects this vector onto the subspace of the stable state distribution(s).
        In the specific case of the two-parameter infinite-look-ahead approximation to the
one-ball game, the eigenvalues of M are (1,1, q1q2 ,- q1q2 ). There are two
eigenvalues of unit magnitude. The matrix M∞ is given by
                1                        0
                        p1        p1q2
                   1 − q1q2 1 − q1q2       
           ∞     0     0           0     0
                                          0
        M = 0           0           0
                     q1 p2        p2       
                0                        1
                   1 − q1q2 1 − q1q2       

Problem 5.23: Given an initial probability distribution of v0=(0,1,0,0)T , compute v1, v2,
v3, v4, v5, and v∞. What are these same vectors for w0=(0,0,1,0)T ? What is the
stochastic limit for the vector (0,1⁄2,1⁄2,0)T ? What is the meaning of these three limits?
Answer: For v0=(0,1,0,0)T , the first few vectors are

                                             92
                      p1           p1             p1(1 + q1q2 )          p1(1+ q1q2 ) 
        0
v 0 =  0 , v1 =  q  , v 2 =  10 2  , v 3 = 
         1             0              qq                     0       , v 4 =  ( q1q2 )2  ,
                        1                                 2
                                                      q1 q2                        0       
        0          0             q1 p2              q1 p2              q p (1 + q q )
                                                                            1 2        1 2
                                             p1 
          (
    p 1 + q q + ( q q )2 
      1     1 2       1 2       )            1 − q1q2 
 5             0                 ∞   ∞ 0       0 .
v =                        , and v = M v =
                3
             q1 q22                              0
                                           q1p2 
       q1 p2 (1 + q1q2 )                            
                                             1 − q1q2 
The first element of these vectors, which corresponds to the probability that player-1 will
win the game after the appropriate number of innings, is seen to be the same as the series
of cumulative probabilities computed in P5.20, and the corresponding element of the v∞
vector agrees also with that from P5.20. Although the 4-node game diagram in Fig. 5.5
seems simpler than the infinite-node diagram in Fig. 5.2, the step-by-step propagation of
the 4-node density vector gives the same information as the more complicated game
diagram. It may also be noted in this example that the sum of the densities for the four
nodes always adds up to 1.
         For w0=(0,0,1,0)T , the first few vectors are
                       0             p1q2             p1q2              p1q2 (1 + q1q2 )
        0
w 0 =  1 , w1 =  02  , w 2 =  q q  , w3 =                , w4 =                  ,
         0              q                 0                    2                      0
                                                           q1q2
                                                                              (q1q2 )
                                                                                          2
                                         1 2               0                                
        0            p2            p2           p2 (1+ q1q2 )         p2 (1 + q1q2 ) 
                                                                p1q2 
              p1q2 (1+ q1q2 )      
                                                                1− q1q2 
  5                q12 q32                    ∞     ∞ 0          0 .
w =                                   , and w = M w =
                       0                                           0
       
              (
        p2 1 + q1q2 + (q1q2 )     )
                                  2                            p2 
                                                                        
                                                                1− q1q2 
        For the (0,1⁄2,1⁄2,0)T vector, the stochastic limit is
                                           p1 (1 + q2 ) 
             0                           1 − q1q2 
              1
          ∞ 2
                            (
        M 1 = 12 M v + w = 12 
             2
                         ∞   0     0
                                        ) 
                                                 0
                                                 0
                                                         
                                                         
             0                           p2 (1+ q1 ) 
                                           1 − q1q2 
For the v0 case, player-1 is given the first shot of the game, and consequently the first
chance to win, whereas in the w 0 case player-2 is given the first shot. For this game
diagram, there are two eigenvalues equal to one, so there are two possible independent,
asymptotic stable solutions for these two initial conditions, v ∞ and w∞. The same game
diagram, and the same Markov analysis, covers both situations. The (0,1⁄2,1⁄2,0)T initial
probability distribution corresponds to the alternating break situation, or perhaps to some

                                                   93
other situation in which each player has the first shot an equal number of times.
        In this simple approximation to the one-ball game, closed-form expressions could
be found for all of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors, but in more complicated game
situations this may not be true. If only a numerical solution is possible, then the
asymptotic stable solutions can be found for any initial density vector by computing the
eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the transition matrix numerically.

       In the winner-breaks match situation, a player with a strong break advantage has
the opportunity to break and win several consecutive games in a row. This may occur
because the player breaks and runs, never allowing the opponent to have a shot, or it may
be because the player is a good tactical player and he never allows his opponent an open
shot on a winnable table. The winner-breaks match situation amplifies the break
advantage in this case through a positive feedback situation. In a loser-breaks match, the
player with the break advantage cannot exploit it because when he wins one game, his
opponent gets to break, nullifying the break advantage. In this case the break advantage
is damped through a negative feedback situation. The following problem shows how this
feedback situation can be quantified.

Problem 5.24: Two players are playing a series of 9-ball games, and the winner of one
game breaks in the subsequent game. When player-1 breaks, player-1 wins with a
probability of p1. When player-2 breaks, player-2 wins with a probability of p2. What
fraction of the total games will player-1 win if a large number of games are played? If
the loser of one game breaks in the next game, what fraction of the total games will
player-1 win? What is the expected outcome in the alternating break situation?
Answer: The game diagrams for the winner-breaks (WB) and for the loser-breaks (LB)
situations are:

There are two states of interest, S1 is when player-1 breaks and S2 is when player-2
breaks. The corresponding transition matrices are:
               p q                  q
        MWB  q1 p2  = , MLB =  p1 q2 
                                           p
                 1     2                1    2
For both of these situations, closed-form solutions can be found for the eigenvalues and
eigenvectors. The eigenvalues for the two cases are (1,p 1+p2-1), and (1,1-p1-p2),
respectively. In both cases, there is only a single eigenvalue of unit magnitude, so each
situation has a single asymptotic distribution given by v∞=R1 for any choice of initial
density v0. This means that it does not matter which player has the initial break in the
match; the long-run winner is determined only by the two probability parameters p1 and

                                            94
p2 and by the match type, WB, LB, or AB. For the WB and LB cases, the R1
eigenvectors are, respectively,
                q2                  p2 
               q +q                 p +p
       R1WB = 1 q 2  , and R1LB = 1 p 2 
                    1                   1 
                q1 + q2             p1 + p2 
In the WB case, player-1 wins a fraction of games corresponding to W WB=R11WB=
q2/(q1+q2); in the LB case, the fraction of games won by player-1 is W LB=R21LB=
p1/(p1+p2).
        In the alternating-break situation, player-1 breaks half of the games, and proceeds
to win the fraction p1 of these, and player-2 breaks the other half of the games, and
player-1 wins the fraction q 2 of these games. The total fraction of games won by player-1
is therefore (p1+q2)/2 in the alternating break situation.

        Contour plots of the winning probabilities W WB, WLB and WAB determined from
P5.24 are shown as a function of p1 and p2 in Fig. 5.6. It is surprising how different these
plots appear. It may be verified that the critical values of p 1 and p2 that correspond to
W=1⁄2 are the same in the WB, LB, and AB matches, namely W=1⁄2 when p1=p2 in all
three cases; this means that the break choice is not expected to change the eventual
winner, provided a large number of games are played in the match; however the margin
by which the winner is expected to win can depend in a significant way on the match
format due to the interplay between the positive and negative feedback effects. This
means that in a match that is handicapped by payout stakes can depend in a significant
way on the break choice. When p1=q2, then the player-1 game probability does not
depend on which player breaks, and there is no break advantage or disadvantage; this
relation is equivalent to p1+p2=1, and it may be verified that WWB=WLB=WAB=p1 in all
three match situations when this condition is satisfied.
        A contour plot of the difference probability, Wdiff=WWB-WLB, is also shown in
Fig. 5.6. The solid positive contour lines correspond to the situations in which player-1
has the best chance in a WB match, and the dashed negative contour lines correspond to
the situations in which player-1 has the best chance in a LB match. It is clear in this
figure that there can be significant differences in the outcomes of the WB and LB
matches. In most situations, the individual probabilities are expected to be close to 0.5
for both players, and the difference contour plot in Fig. 5.6 shows that the break choice
makes only a small difference in the outcome in these situations. However, the most
drastic differences occur when one of the players has a strong break advantage or
disadvantage. Table 5.4 gives the player-1 winning probabilities for a few selected
values of p1 and p2 that demonstrate these trends.

                                             95
                                     WW B                                                                WL B
         1                                                                         1
                  0.1                                                                       0.1 0.2
                                                                                                   0.3
        0.8                                                                       0.8
                  0.2                                                                                      0.4
                   0.3                                                                                             0.5
        0.6                                                                       0.6
   p2                                                                        p2                                        0.6
                   0.4
        0.4                                                                       0.4
                                                                                                                             0.7
                              0.5
                                                                                                                               0.8
        0.2                                                                       0.2
                                     0.6       0.7
                                                       0.8 0.9                                                                0.9
         0                                                                         0
              0         0.2         0.4        0.6      0.8         1                   0     0.2    0.4         0.6     0.8         1
                                          p1                                                               p1

                                     WA B
         1
                   0.1
                         0.2
        0.8
                               0.3
                                     0.4
        0.6
                                           0.5
   p2
                                                 0.6
        0.4
                                                     0.7
                                                           0.8
        0.2
                                                              0.9

         0
              0         0.2         0.4        0.6      0.8         1
                                          p1

          Fig. 5.6. Contour plots of the player-1 winning game fraction W for three
          types of matches: winner-breaks, loser-breaks, and alternating breaks. The
          p1 parameter is the fraction of games that player-1 wins when player-1
          breaks, and p2 is the fraction of games that player-2 wins when player-2
          breaks. When the contour lines are closely spaced, then the winning
          fraction W is very sensitive to small changes in the parameters p1 and p2.

        The first three rows of Table 5.4 correspond to equally matched players. In the
first row, both players might be weak runout players, or weak tactical players, who tend
to lose most of the games that they break, and both players have a break disadvantage; in
the second row both players win the same percentage of games that they lose when they
break, and neither player has a break advantage or a break disadvantage; in the third row,
both players might be strong runout players, or strong tactical players who tend to control
the table once they get a shot, and the break is an advantage that can be exploited by both
players. Matches between equal-strength players are expected to be even in WB, LB, and

                                                                        96
AB situations, as seen in the first three rows. The next two rows show the expected result
from a strong mismatch; in the fourth row player-1 is the underdog, and in the fifth row
he is the strong favorite. Since p1+p2=1 in these two cases, there is no break advantage
and the winning expectations are equal for all three match situations.

Table 5.4. Comparison of WB, LB, and AB winning probabilities.
  Row         p1          p2        WWB          WLB       WAB
   1           .1          .1         .5          .5         .5
   2           .5          .5         .5          .5         .5
   3           .9          .9         .5          .5         .5
   4           .1          .9         .1          .1         .1
   5           .9          .1         .9          .9         .9
   6           .5          .1        .64         .83         .7
   7           .5          .9        .17         .36         .3
   8           .9          .5        .83         .64         .7
   9           .1          .5        .36         .17         .3
   10         .95         .94        .54         .50       .505

        Rows six and seven are two cases in which moderate mismatches occur and in
which player-1 is the medium-strength player. In row six, he is favored to win over a
weak opponent in both WB and LB match situations, but he is expected to win a much
higher fraction of games in the LB match than in the WB match. This is because in the
LB situation, player-1 can win one game and then take advantage of his opponent’s
breakshot weakness immediately in the next game by forcing him to break. The AB win
fraction is between those of the WB and LB, and this trend holds for all combinations of
the parameters p1 and p2. In row seven, player-1 is a medium strength player playing
against a strong player; he is expected to lose in all three types of match situations, but
his game percentage is about twice as large in the LB match as in the WB match. This is
because he breaks more often than his stronger opponent in the LB situation, and
although he does not benefit particularly from his own breaks, he keeps his opponent
from exploiting his break advantage. The last two rows show the same types of
mismatches as rows six and seven, but with the assumption that player-1 is the strong
player (row eight) or the weak player (row nine) against a medium strength player; in
both cases, a WB match situation is most beneficial to player-1. In row eight, player-1
benefits in the WB situation by exploiting his break advantage. In row nine, player-1 is
actually penalized by being forced to break, and he breaks fewer times in the WB
situation than in the LB situation which helps him limit his loses.
        Row ten shows the expected results for two strong players who are closely, but
not exactly, matched. Player-1 has a very slight 1% win-while-breaking game probability
advantage over that of his opponent. It is interesting that in the WB match, this small
advantage is magnified into a 4% difference in the expected game fraction, whereas in the
LB match, the effect of this small advantage is almost eliminated in the expected game

                                            97
fraction. In the AB match, the 1% p advantages gets diluted to a 0.5% W advantage. The
amplification of small differences of WB matches is a consequence of the clustering of
the contour lines in the upper right corner of the WWB graph in Fig. 5.6. Similarly, the
damping out of such differences in the LB situation is a consequence of the wide spacing
of the contour lines in the upper right corner of the WLB graph. When player-1 has a
slight breakshot advantage over his strong opponent, then he should prefer the WB
situation, but when he has a slight breakshot disadvantage compared to his strong
opponent, then he should prefer the LB situation.

Problem 5.25. Two players play a stakes-handicapped match in which player-1 wins 1.0
points for each game that he wins and he loses 2.0 points for each game that he loses.
The win-while-break percentages for the two opponents are p1=0.9 and p2=0.5. What is
the expected outcome for WB, LB, and AB matches?
Answer: The expectation of return R by player-1 for each game is given by
        R = W ⋅ ZW − L ⋅ Z L
where W is the probability of winning each game, Z W is the number of points that he wins
for each of these games, L=(1-W) is the losing game probability and ZL is the number of
points that he loses. Using the results from Table 5.4, it is seen that
RWB=(.83)(1.0)-(.17)(2.0)=0.49, RLB=(.64)(1.0)-(.36)(2.0)=-0.08, and
RAB=(.70)(1.0)-(.30)(2.0)=0.10. Player-1 is expected to win in the WB match and AB
match situation, but he is expected to lose in the LB match situation.

       Fig. 5.7. The general game diagram for a progressive drill has n nodes and
       n independent probability parameters.

        A progressive practice drill has a difficulty parameter that can be increased or
decreased. A difficulty parameter might be a shot angle, or a shot distance, or some cue
ball position goal, the number of object balls, or some combination of such parameters.
In a progressive practice drill, when the player succeeds at one level of difficulty, then he
is rewarded by being allowed to attempt the next level of difficulty; when the player fails
at a level of difficulty, then he is penalized by being forced back to the previous level.
Suppose that there are n levels of difficulty, numbered 1…n. Failure at the first level
means that the player attempts that level again, and success at the nth level means that
level-n is attempted again. Suppose that the probability of success at the ith level is
denoted pi, and the failure probability is therefore qi=1-pi. The game diagram for a
general progressive practice drill is shown in Fig. 5.7. The Markov transition matrix for
such a progressive drill has the form

                                             98
           q1             q2 0  L         0
           p1              0 O L          M
       M=  0              p2 O qn−1       0
                                             
           M              L O    0       qn 
          0               L 0 pn−1       pn 
This matrix form is called a tridiagonal matrix because the only nonzero elements occur
in the diagonal or in the elements adjacent to the diagonal. A property of such a
tridiagonal matrix is that for 0<pi<1, there are no repeated eigenvalues; in particular,
there is a single eigenvalue of unity, and therefore there is a single stable probability
distribution for a progressive drill. If a practice drill is performed for a large number of
steps, then this unique distribution will be approached in the stochastic limit, and the
statistical parameters associated with this distribution can be used to assess the player’s
performance at the drill.

                                   Model Progressive 9-Ball Distribution
                  1

                 0.8
                                                                                              ∞
                                                                                             v9

                                                       v2∞
                 0.6
                                                                                       v6∞
          v i∞                                                         v3∞                    ∞
                                                                             v∞
                                                                              4
                                                                                   ∞
                                                                                  v5         v7    ∞
                                                                                                  v8
                 0.4

                               ∞
                              v1
                 0.2

                  0
                       0            0.2          0.4             0.6              0.8                  1
                                                             p

       Fig. 5.8. The components of the stochastic limit distribution v∞ are plotted
       as a function of the shot-success parameter p for the model progressive 9-
       ball drill with pi=p(i-1). The distribution changes significantly as a
       function of p, and this means that the distribution is a sensitive measure of
       performance.

Problem 5.26: In the progressive 9-ball drill, the player starts by throwing the 9-ball
randomly on the table, taking the cue ball in hand, and shooting the 9-ball. Upon success,
the 8-ball and the 9-ball are thrown on the table and the player attempts to run both balls
from ball in hand. In general, a successful run of i balls means that a run of i+1 balls is

                                                        99
attempted, and a failure at a run of i balls means that, on the next turn, a run of i-1 balls is
attempted. Assume that the probability of success for i balls is pi=p(i-1) where p is an
average probability of making an individual shot. What is the expected distribution for p
equal to 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 0.95, and 0.99? What are the mean, median, mode, and
standard deviations for each of these distributions?
Answer: The expected distributions are the stochastic limit v∞ which is determined from
the right eigenvector R1 of the matrix M∞ associated with the eigenvalue ¬=1, and scaled
so that the elements total to unit probability. The coefficients of R1 are plotted as a
function of the shot success parameter p in Fig. 5.8. These probability distributions for
the specific values of p are given in Table 5.5, along with the associated statistical
parameters. Because the distribution changes significantly with small changes in p, it
provides a sensitive assessment of performance.

Table 5.5. Model Progressive 9-Ball Drill Statistics
  p      d1     d2     d3     d4     d5     d6     d7     d8     d9     x       Mode   x˜   ß
    .5   .210   .419   .280   .080   .011   .001   .000   .000   .000   2.264    2     2     .920
    .6   .138   .346   .324   .149   .037   .005   .000   .000   .000   2.618    2     3    1.051
    .7   .069   .231   .318   .237   .107   .031   .006   .001   .000   3.201    3     3    1.236
    .8   .018   .088   .195   .256   .222   .135   .060   .020   .005   4.354    4     4    1.526
    .9   .000   .004   .017   .052   .110   .177   .223   .227   .190   6.964    8     7    1.567
  .95    .000   .000   .000   .002   .011   .038   .112   .272   .565   8.333    9     9     .928
  .99    .000   .000   .000   .000   .000   .000   .005   .076   .918   8.912    9     9     .306

Exercise 5.1. Practice the progressive 9-ball drill over an extended period of time and
accumulate the data for the number of successes and number of failures at each level.
From these data, an empirical value of the success probability p i at each level can be
estimated. Use these empirical values and determine the corresponding stochastic limit
distribution. Compare this hypothetical distribution to the actual distribution, which
consists of the total attempts (successes+failures) at each level. If there are significant
differences, then this shows where the most significant improvements in performance are
possible. For example, if there seem to be too many small-i attempts, then additional
focus may be needed for these “easy” cases, or there may be some intimidation on the
long run attempts.
        Almost any kind of shot or game situation may be turned into a progressive drill
and subjected to this kind of stochastic analysis. For example, for 8-ball, the player
might throw out an equal number of stripes and solids along with the 8-ball, take ball in
hand, and attempt to run out. Upon success, one more ball of each type is thrown out at
the beginning, until all 15 balls are initially on the table.

     In the National Pool League (NPL) handicap system (see, for example,
http://www.accessone.com/~mavlon/handicap.html), each player has a

                                                   100
numerical skill rating estimate. If R1 and R2 are the skill ratings for two opponents, then
the probability p that player-1 will win an individual game is assumed to be given by
                      1
          p=       −(R1 − R2 )/30
              1+2
or, equivalently, the rating difference between two opponents satisfies the relation
                      30         p 
          R1 − R2 =        log
                    log2         1− p 
Skill ratings range from about 20 for beginners to around 80 for experienced amateur
players to over 130 for professional-level players. Each additional rating difference of 30
points results in another factor of two in the ratio of game probabilities p/q. Matchups are
chosen based on the analysis in P5.5. In general, for a given p1, The match probability
W(p;m,n) is determined for values of m+n that are reasonable for tournament play, and
the combination that gives the match probability closest to W=0.5 is chosen. The
following table contains four sets of matchups. Chart-8 is used for short matches when
the time for each match needs to be minimized, Chart-10 is used for regular length
matches, and Chart-12 is used when longer matches can be played. In some situations,
short charts are used for lower-rated players and longer charts are used for higher-rated
players. Longer and shorter charts than those shown here may also be used in particular
league or tournament situations. Chart-20 is a very long match chart and is included for
comparison purposes. When a player wins a match in the NPL system, his skill rating
increases by a point, and when a player loses a match his skill rating decreases. Because
of this adjustment, the skill rating estimate tends to fluctuate somewhat about a mean
value that reflects the player’s true skill rating. The skill rating value may be used to
label the states in a game diagram, and because transitions are allowed only between
nearby states, the game diagram for the NPL handicap system is the same as for a
progressive drill as shown in Fig. 5.7, and the corresponding Markov transition matrix is
tridiagonal.
         In order to perform a stochastic simulation of the NPL handicap system, it is
useful to introduce a few simplifying approximations. It is assumed that a particular
player of interest, player-1, has a true skill that corresponds to a skill rating of R Actual.
He plays against an infinite number of opponents, all of whom have skill ratings that also
correspond to ROpponent=RActual. As player-1 plays against these opponents, his skill
rating estimate will fluctuate about R Actual. At any particular time player-1’s apparent
skill rating will be denoted RApparent. It is RApparent that is used to determine the game
matchup, using the charts in Table 5.6, but the actual game probability is determined by
RActual-ROpponent=0. For example, suppose that a tournament is using Chart-10, and the
apparent rating difference is 5 points, which means that the matchup is 5:5.
W(0.5;5,5)=0.5 then defines the transition probability for player-1 to advance to the next
higher skill rating, and (1-W(0.5;5,5))=0.5 defines the probability for the player to fall
back to the next lower skill rating. If player-1 wins this match, the apparent skill rating

                                             101
difference for his next match will be 6 points and the next matchup will be 5:4. From
P5.6 it is seen that W(0.5;5,4)=0.363. Player-1 is now overrated and is more likely to lose
this match than to win it. Similarly, when player-1 loses enough matches his apparent
rating will be 6 points too low, the match probability will be W(0.5;4,5)=0.637. At this
point, player-1 is underrated and is more likely to win than to lose. According to this
mechanism, the player has a tendency to fluctuate about his true skill rating; if his
apparent rating gets too low there is a tendency for him to start winning a majority of his
matches and for his rating to adjust up back to its correct level, and if his apparent rating
gets too high there is a tendency to lose a majority of his matches and for his rating to
adjust back down to its correct level.
Table 5.6. Examples of four charts used in the NPL handicap system.
                  Chart-10                                      Chart-8
  Rating Difference        Match Games         Rating Difference        Match Games
         0-5                   5:5                    0-6                   4:4
        6-14                   5:4                   7-18                   4:3
       15-21                   6:4                   19-29                  5:3
       22-28                   5:3                   30-39                  4:2
       29-36                   6:3                   40-48                  5:2
       37-46                   7:3                   49-up                  6:2
       47-56                   6:2
       57-up                   7:2                             Chart-20
                                               Rating Difference        Match Games
                  Chart-12                            0-2                  10:10
  Rating Difference        Match Games                3-7                   10:9
         0-4                   6:6                   8-12                   10:8
        5-11                   6:5                   13-17                  11:8
       12-17                   7:5                   18-22                  11:7
       18-22                   6:4                   23-27                  12:7
       23-28                   7:4                   28-33                  12:6
       29-35                   8:4                   34-36                  13:6
       36-42                   7:3                   37-40                  14:6
       43-48                   8:3                   41-45                  13:5
       49-58                   9:3                   46-51                  14:5
       59-68                   8:2                   52-59                  14:4
       69-up                   9:2                   60-68                  16:4
                                                     69-75                  15:3
                                                     76-77                  16:3
                                                     78-87                  17:3
                                                     88-97                  16:2
                                                    98-100                  17:2
                                                    101-up                  18:2

       Fig. 5.9 shows the stochastic distributions v∞ for the four charts in Table 5.6 with
the above assumptions. These are called the natural distributions because they depend
only on the granularity introduced by the matchups. In general, it is seen that there are

                                            102
two components to the widths of a given distribution. One component is the flat region at
the top which is due to the W=0.5 transition probability for near-zero apparent rating
differences. This flat region is wider for the shorter-match charts than for the longer-
match charts. The other component of the width is the falloff that is induced by the
matchup differences. This component would occur even for longer matches than shown
in Fig. 5.9, but in general the falloff is more rapid for longer matches than for shorter
matches, as discussed in P5.7. The Chart-20 distribution displays both characteristics of
the long-matches: a narrow flat region and a rapid falloff.

                                       NPL Handicap Natural Distribution
                   0.12
                                                                                 Chart-8
                                                                                 Chart-10
                     0.1
                                                                                 Chart-12
                                                                                 Chart-20
                   0.08
          Distribution
            Rating

                   0.06

                   0.04

                   0.02

                             0
                                 -20          -10             0             10       20
                                                    Apparent       Actual
                                                    R             -R
       Fig. 5.9. The natural distributions v∞ of rating variations are shown for
       four NPL charts. The variations away from the correct rating are
       relatively small in all cases, but the peak is sharper generally for longer
       matches than for shorter matches.

         An improved simulation can be achieved by relaxing some of the simplifying
approximations used in the preceding stochastic analysis. One approximation is that the
opponents’ skill ratings are estimated exactly. It can be assumed that there is a
probability distribution {dj} of actual skill ratings for the opponents. Player-1 has an
actual skill rating of R Actual and an apparent skill rating of Ri ; the opponent has an actual
skill rating of Rj , occurring with probability dj, and an apparent skill rating of RActual.
The probability for player-1 to win a match is then given by the expression
        Wi =        ∑ d jW ( p j ; mi ,ni )
                         j
in which pj is determined by the actual skill difference (RActual-Rj) and the matchup mi:ni
is determined by the apparent skill difference (R i-RActual). This kind of expression

                                                        103
involving summations of probability distributions is called a convolution. The question
then arises as to what opponent distribution {dj} should be used. An obvious answer is to
use the same distribution for both the opponents and for player-1. This distribution is
determined in a self-consistent manner. Some reasonable approximation for {dj}is
assumed, and the corresponding stochastic distribution v ∞ for player-1 is determined
from the eigenvalue analysis of the transition matrix. This stochastic distribution then
defines a new {dj}, which then results in a new transition matrix, which then results in a
new stochastic distribution. After a few cycles of this process, the input distribution {dj}
converges to the same as the output stochastic distribution v∞, and self-consistency is
achieved. This process in which the stochastic distribution depends on itself is called
autocorrelation. In the case of the NPL handicap distributions, this has a very small
effect, too small to notice the difference when plotted as in Fig. 5.9. The standard
deviation for the Chart-8 distribution widens from 4.963 for the natural distribution to
4.978 with autocorrelation, for Chart-10 it widens from 4.634 to 4.654, for Chart-12 it
widens from 4.269 to 4.291, and for Chart-20 it widens from 3.668 to 3.697. Further
improvements in the simulation require additional assumptions about the distribution of
actual and apparent skill ratings for the opponents, and about the day-to-day and match-
to-match fluctuations of actual skill that all players display. In general, all of these
effects tend to smooth and widen the stochastic distributions compared to the natural
distributions shown in Fig. 5.9 and to the autocorrelated distributions described above.
For the efficient numerical treatment of the convolution of several distribution variables,
methods based on Fourier transforms are usually employed.
          In addition to the matches of limited length that have been analyzed previously in
this section, another common type of match is the n-ahead match. The players keep
playing games until one of them manages to get n games ahead of the other player, and
this terminates the match. It is also possible to handicap such a match, so that one of the
players needs m games ahead to win, while the other player needs n games. The game
diagram for a general handicapped n-ahead match is shown in Fig. 5.10. For a match of
this type handicapped at m:n, the game graph has (m+n+1) nodes, m of which are on one
side of the starting node S0, and n of which are on the other. It is assumed that the
probability of winning an individual game is independent of the score, and for simplicity
it is assumed that the breaker of each game does not affect the game probability, although
it is straightforward to incorporate differing probabilities for these situations if such data
is available. The Markov transition matrix for the n-ahead game always has two
eigenvalues of unity; this may be verified by expanding the secular equation in cofactors
and minors first along the first column (corresponding to the losing node L), and then
along the last column (corresponding to the winning node W), exposing two (1-¬) factors
in the characteristic polynomial. The following problem shows these general features for
a specific game diagram, but the general approach can be applied to any n-ahead type
match situation.

                                             104
        Fig. 5.10. The game diagram for a general handicapped n-ahead type
        match is shown. From the starting node S0, player-1 needs m games to
        win the match and player-2 needs n games.

Problem 5.27: Two players play a handicapped 3-ahead type match. Compute the
player-1 match probability W as a function of p, the probability of winning an individual
game, if the match is handicapped at 1:5, 2:4, 3:3, 4:2, and 5:1.
Answer: There are 7 nodes in the game diagrams for all of these cases, and the Markov
transition matrix M for all of these cases is given by
              1 q 0 0 0 0 0
              0 0 q 0 0 0 0
               0 p 0 q 0 0 0
        M =  0 0 p 0 q 0 0
              0 0 0 p 0 q 0
              0 0 0 0 p 0 0
              0 0 0 0 0 p 1
The different handicaps correspond to different choices for the initial probability. The
1:5 match corresponds to the vector v 0=(0,0,0,0,0,1,0)T , the 2:4 match corresponds to
v0=(0,0,0,0,1,0,0)T , the 3:3 match corresponds to v 0=(0,0,0,1,0,0,0)T , the 4:2 match
corresponds to v0=(0,0,1,0,0,0,0)T , and the 5:1 match corresponds to v0=(0,1,0,0,0,0,0)T .
The eigenvectors and eigenvalues of this matrix can be determined in closed form. The
stochastic limit for this match situation is determined from
           (1 − pq )(1− 3pq ) − p 5 (1 − pq )(1 − 3 pq ) − p 4     q3                q4                         q5               
     1        (  −    )(  −     )      (  −    )(  −      )    ( 3 pq )
                                                                   −          (  −    )(1 − 3 pq)        (  −    )(1 − 3 pq )
                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                  
M∞ =  0
                1   pq   1   3pq         1   pq   1   3 pq       1             1   pq                     1   pq
                      0                         0                 0                    0                          0              0
     0               0                         0                 0                    0                          0              0
        0             0                         0                 0                    0                          0              0
     0               0                         0                 0                    0                          0              0
     0               0                         0                 0                    0                          0              0
     
        0
                     p5                        p4                 p3        (1− pq)(1 − 3 pq) − q 4   (1 − pq )(1− 3pq ) − q 5   1
             (1 − pq)(1 − 3pq )        (1 − pq)(1 − 3 pq)    (1 − 3 pq )     (1 − pq )(1 − 3 pq)        (1 − pq )(1 − 3 pq )     

from which it is seen that the match probability for the various cases are given by
relatively simple ratios of polynomials. These probabilities are plotted as a function of p
for the various match situations in Fig. 5.11. Note that Fig. 5.11 could have been
determined numerically even if closed-form expressions for M ∞ were not available.

                                                             105
                                   N-Ahead Match Probabilities
        1
       0.9

       0.8
       0.7

       0.6
W(p)   0.5

       0.4

       0.3

       0.2
                       1:5          2:4     3:3     4:2   5:1
       0.1

        0
             0   0.1         0.2      0.3         0.4      0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9   1
                                                            p

 Fig. 5.11. Match probability W as a function of the player-1 game
 probability p for n-ahead matches handicapped at 1:5, 2:4, 3:3, 4:2, and
 5:1.

                                                        106
Acknowledgments: Much of this material has been compiled over a long period of time.
The author first became interested in the physics of pool during a college physics course
(not an uncommon occurrence). Some more recent material has been added as a result of
ongoing discussions in the newsgroup rec.sport.billiard involving many
participants. This newsgroup is highly recommended to anyone interested in discussions
involving the various aspects of pool and billiards games.

Further Reading: Considering that many important and interesting aspects of pool and
billiards may be understood with only simple application of classical physics, and that
quite useful results can be obtained even with rather crude approximations, there has been
traditionally relatively little physics included in most instructional pool books. Simple
physics problems involving pool balls are often included in problem sets in physics text
books, but these are not discussed usually in the context of using the results in actual
play, but rather as a device to teach a physical principle or in the application of an
analytic method. Some of the exceptions to this trend are the regular columns by Bob
Jewett in Billiards Digest. Another good publication is the book “The Physics of Pocket
Billiards” by W. C. Marlow. While this present manuscript concentrates mostly on
theoretical relations combined with practice exercises, Marlow’s book includes
descriptions of experimental setups to measure tip-ball contact times, ball-ball contact
times, various coefficients of friction, and many other interesting things.

                                           107
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/amazing_frozen_kiss_shots.pdf
title: Amazing Frozen Kiss Shots
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Amazing Frozen Kiss Shots”                                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    In June, at the last BCA Expo in Vegas, I spent several days with a group of PBIA Master Instructors sharing
our teaching methods and experiences. During a break, we were showing each other cool shots we have
learned over the years. Image 1 shows the layout for a famous shot Mark Finkelstein demonstrated. What
would you do in this 8-ball situation, shooting at the 8? In online video NV J.126, I explore some interesting
and useful alternatives that I will summarize here.

                                       Image 1 Famous Frozen Kiss Shot

     As demonstrated in the video, the most creative and effective solution is to pocket the 8 back in the corner
for the win by aiming for about an 1/8-ball hit. It doesn’t look like the shot should go because the tangent line
off the 11 heads into the cushion, so how does it work? As shown with super-slow-motion footage in the video,
the 11 compresses the cushion and then kisses the 8 to redirect it. The shot would not be possible without the
secondary kiss.

     If you try the shot, it is important to know how to make adjustments if the 8 doesn’t go. If you cut the 8 too
thin, it will hit the cushion. And if you hit the 8 too full, it will go away from the rail. Simply adjust the amount of
cut until the 8 goes straight back to the corner. Again, the shot requires about an 1/8-ball hit, and the 11 and
13 must be frozen for the shot to work. If there is a gap, the 11 goes forward too much and doesn’t kiss the 8
enough.

      Now let’s look at some interested related shots. In Image 2, the 3 frozen balls are stripes instead. The 13
doesn’t go because the 11 throws it into to the cushion causing it to rebound away from the rail. But if this were
a proposition shot, where the goal was to make both the 9 and 13 on one shot, you could make it work with a
little spit. Just wet the contact point between the 11 and 13 to minimize throw, and the 13 goes easily. If there
were a gap between the 11 and 13, the 9 will not go, but the 13 will without the spit. As shown in super-slow-
motion in the video, the 11 compresses the cushion a little and cuts the 13 away from the rail enough to cancel
the throw.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          February, 2023
                                       Image 2 Spitball Proposition Shot

    Now let’s look at other shot alternatives, starting with ball-in-hand options. First, it is not possible to pocket
the 8 directly into the corner. As shown in Image 3, even with a near miss on the 11, the 8 heads too far from
the pocket. As shown in Image 4, another option is the bank the 8 off two rails to the diagonal corner. As
shown in the video, leaving the CB above the 11 and 13 limits the opponent options a little in case you miss.
Unfortunately, your opponent still might be able to kick across the table to get out of trouble.

                                       Image 3 The 8 Can’t be Thrown In

Billiards Digest                                                                                        February, 2023
                                      Image 4 Two-Rail Bank Option

    As shown in Image 5, shooting stripes, with the 8 in the middle instead, an option is to bank the 13 cross-
corner. Left spin transferred to the 13 by the throwing 8 reverses the angle off the far cushion back to the
pocket. That would be a good one-pocket shot. The 13 could also kiss off the 11 or combo the 11 in. As
demonstrated in the video, you can even pocket both balls. That would be another fun proposition shot.

                                   Image 5 Cross-Corner Bank Options
Billiards Digest                                                                                  February, 2023
    There are also good safety options in the situation in Image 1. The easiest safety is to just hit the 8 squarely.
However, the 11 and 13 are both frozen to the cushion, so something must be driven to a cushion after the hit.
A better option is to extract the 8 a little and try to leave the CB behind the 8 as shown in Image 6. See the
video for demonstrations of various safety options and replies.

                                               Image 6 Safety Option

   Check out online video NV J.126. It demonstrates all the options above and more. Pool always amazes
me with all the creative shot options that are possible in single ball-layout situation. Give the shots a try and
add them to your repertoire of game winners and fun proposition shots. Have fun! I did!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV J.126 – Amazing FROZEN KISS Shot for the 8-Ball Win
  normal video

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         February, 2023
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/an_update_on_tom_ross.pdf
title: An Update on Tom Ross Cue Times Billiards News, August, 2014
topics: cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“An Update on Tom Ross”
Cue Times Billiards News, August, 2014

by Dr. Dave Alciatore (with help from Tom Ross)

Tom and I have been good friends for many years. We first met as monthly columnists for
Billiards Digest magazine. In 2010, after over a year of work together, Tom and I released the
“Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots” (VEPS) DVD series. I could not have created VEPS without
Tom’s wealth of knowledge, experience, and prowess at the pool table. Because of my
friendship and respect for Tom, Cue Times asked me to work with him to provide an update on
how he is doing.

Since 1978, Tom has taught over 4,500 pool students from every walk of life and every level of
play from beginner to National Champion. He has also published countless instructional articles
for Cue Times, Billiards Digest, and Ozone Billiards. His articles have appeared monthly in Cue
Times since 1998.

For about 20 years, Tom worked at Shakespeare’s Pool Hall (now closed) and then the Skylark
Lounge on Broadway in Denver. He was a well-liked bartender at the Skylark and hosted a
weekly pool seminar where he freely shared his pool knowledge and helped inspire countless
people of all walks of life to appreciate and love our wonderful game. Tom also taught private
lessons for many years.

Unfortunately, soon after Tom and I released the VEPS DVD series, he suffered a stroke (in
November, 2010). That’s why the following clause has appeared with Tom’s articles in Cue
Times in recent years: ”Due to an ongoing health issue, Tom will not be contributing new articles
for a while. For now, we will dip into his vast archives while he’s on the mend. Please keep Tom
in your thoughts and prayers.”

Tom’s stroke affected muscle control on the right side of his body and affected the part of the
brain that controls speech. Tom didn’t lose his personality and mental faculties … he’s still as
sharp and personable as he ever was … but his ability to communicate is not what it used to be.
He can understand everything he hears, and he can read, but it remains difficult for him to
express himself with speech and in writing (although, he has shown slow but noticeable
improvement each year). Fortunately for us, Tom was a very prolific writer before his stroke,
and Cue Times has hundreds of articles to continue to share in the future. Hopefully, you have
learned from Tom’s past articles and continue to look forward to and learning from the ones you
haven’t seen yet. I, for one, look forward to reading Tom’s article each and every month.

Since the stroke, Tom no longer works at the Skylark Lounge or gives lessons; however, he has
found other things to keep himself busy and active. He is in two pool leagues (straight pool on
Mondays, and 8-ball/9-ball on Wednesdays, both at Felt Billiards in Englewood). His game is
not what it used to be due to the reduced control in his right arm, but he still enjoys the game
and embraces the challenge of trying to improve. His favorite game lately is straight pool. He
played straight pool competitively for many years in his early pool career. His high run in the
past was 93. Since his stroke, his new high run is 24, which is quite good given his post-stroke
symptoms. Tom loves the challenge that straight pool provides, and looks forward to continually
trying to better his post-stroke high run.

Tom has no trouble finding people to play pool with him. In fact, some people who feared
playing him in the past (because he was too good) are more than happy to line up to challenge
him now. I have to admit that I look forward to playing sessions with Tom now that I actually
have a chance to give him a decent game. Luckily, Tom sees the fun in this and is happy to
oblige the “challengers” who now have a glimmer of hope.

Tom has many other interests these days as well. He loves to fly fish, and he has also found a
renewed passion for golf. The loss of full muscle control on his right side has affected his
finesse and speed control at the pool table, but it has less of an effect on his golf swing. He
also enjoys spending time with his loving dog Castle who has been with him since just before
his stroke.

We hope you continue to enjoy and benefit from Tom’s instructional articles that will continue to
run in Cue Times. If you see Tom at Felt, on the links, or by a stream, please say hi and thank
him for everything he has done for the pool world.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/analysis_of_a_winning_computational_billiards_player.pdf
title: Analysis of a Winning Computational Billiards Player
topics: cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills, robotics_and_computation
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
Analysis of a Winning Computational Billiards Player ∗

                             Christopher Archibald, Alon Altman and Yoav Shoham
                                          Computer Science Department
                                              Stanford University
                                {cja, epsalon, shoham}@stanford.edu

                          Abstract
     We discuss C UE C ARD, the program that won the
     2008 Computer Olympiad computational pool tour-
     nament. Beside addressing intrinsic interest in a
     complex competitive environment with unique fea-
     tures, our goal is to isolate the factors that con-
     tributed to the performance so that the lessons can
     be transferred to other, similar domains. Speciﬁ-
     cally, we distinguish among pure engineering fac-
     tors (such as using a computer cluster), domain-                            Figure 1: Pool table racked for 8-ball
     speciﬁc factors (such as optimized break shots),
     and domain-independent factors (such as state clus-             victory? And ﬁnally, what generalizable techniques and prin-
     tering). Our conclusion is that each type of factor             ciples were used by C UE C ARD which might be instructive or
     contributed to the performance of the program.                  productive when applied to other AI domains?
                                                                        This paper is structured as follows: In Section 2 we de-
                                                                     scribe the ofﬁcial 8-ball rules and the computational pool
1 Introduction                                                       setting. In Section 3, we give an overview of our agent de-
The International Computer Games Association (ICGA) has              sign and emphasize some key elements unique to C UE C ARD.
in recent years introduced computational pool as a new game          Section 4 contains a detailed experimental analysis of the in-
to the Computer Olympiad. Billiards games have several               dividual contributions of C UE C ARD’s components. Finally,
characteristics that make them unique among games played             in Section 5 we conclude with a discussion of the lessons
by computer agents, and indeed among games in general. In            learned from this domain.
particular, they have continuous state and action spaces, ac-
tions are taken at discrete-time intervals, there is a turn-taking   2 Background
structure, and the results of actions are stochastic. This com-
bination of features is unique and differs from other compet-
                                                                     2.1   Rules of 8-ball
itive AI domains such as chess [Levy and Newborn, 1991],             The game played in the ICGA computational pool tourna-
poker [Billings et al., 2002], robotic soccer [Stone, 2007], or      ment is 8-ball, based on the ofﬁcial rules of the Billiards
the Trading Agent Competition [Wellman et al., 2007]. Thus,          Congress of America [1992]. 8-ball is played on a rectangu-
the challenge of billiards is novel and invites application of       lar pool table with six pockets which is initially racked with
techniques drawn from many AI ﬁelds such as path planning,           15 object balls (7 solids, 7 stripes, and one 8-ball), and a cue
planning under uncertainty, adversarial search [Korf, 1995]          ball (see Figure 1). The play begins with one player’s break.
and motion planning [Latombe, 1991].                                 If a ball is sunk on the break, the breaking player keeps his or
   In this paper, we discuss C UE C ARD, the winning program         her turn, and must shoot again. Otherwise, the other player
from the third ICGA computational pool tournament held in            gets a chance to shoot.
2008. The aim of this paper is not to comprehensively de-               The ﬁrst ball legally pocketed determines which side (solid
scribe C UE C ARD , but rather to determine answers to ques-         or stripes) each player is on. Players retain their turn as long
tions such as the following: To what extent was C UE C ARD’s         as they call an object ball of their type and a pocket and pro-
success due to engineering and brute force? How much did             ceed to legally sink the called ball into the called pocket. In
domain speciﬁc innovations and optimizations contribute to           case of a foul, such as sinking the cue ball into a pocket,
                                                                     the other player gets to place the cue-ball at any position on
  ∗ This work was supported by NSF grants IIS-0205633-001 and        the table (“ball-in-hand”). After all object balls of the active
SES-0527650.                                                         player’s side have been sunk that player must attempt to sink

                                                                 1377
the 8-ball. At this point, calling and legally sinking the 8-ball           deemed feasible (i.e. pocket a ball with no Gaussian
wins the game.                                                              noise added) are passed to the next step.
2.2     Computational pool                                               3. For each feasible (ϕ , vi ) pair, variants are generated by
                                                                            randomly assigning feasible values to a, b and θ .
The ICGA computational tournament is based on a client-
server model where a server maintains the state of a virtual                 (a) Each such variant is simulated between 25 and 100
pool table and executes shots sent by client software agents                     times, depending on available time.
on the P OOL F IZ physics simulator [Greenspan, 2006]. Each                  (b) The resulting states (projected table state after shot
agent has a 10 minute time limit per game to choose shots.                       simulations) are scored using an evaluation func-
   A shot is represented by ﬁve real numbers: v, ϕ , θ , a, and                  tion, allowing the calculation of an average score
b. v represents the cue velocity upon striking the cue ball, ϕ                   for each shot variant. C UE C ARD uses the same
represents the cue orientation, θ represents the angle of the                    evaluation function as P ICK P OCKET, which is de-
cue stick above the table, and a and b designate the position                    scribed in detail in [Smith, 2007].
on the cue ball where the cue stick strikes, which plays a big               (c) The top two shot variants for each (ϕ , vi ) pair are
role in imparting spin, or “english", to the cue ball. Since the                 selected.
physics simulator is deterministic, and in order to simulate                 (d) For these top two variants, the states resulting from
less than perfect skill, Gaussian noise is added to the shot                     the simulations in Step 3a are clustered into groups
parameters on the server side. The result of the noised shot is                  of similar table states. A representative state is cho-
then communicated back to the clients.                                           sen for each cluster, and a weighted set of represen-
   In the 2008 competition C UE C ARD played against two                         tative states is formed.
opponents who have participated in previous competitions:
P ICK P OCKET [Smith, 2007] and E LIX1 . P ICK P OCKET was               4. The top 20 shot variants among all shots tested are se-
the champion of all previous competitions, and was thus the                 lected for further evaluation.
state of the art as we began designing C UE C ARD. In the                5. To reﬁne the evaluation of each of these 20 shots, we
tournament, each agent played a 39 game match against each                  execute a second level of search starting with the repre-
other agent. C UE C ARD won the tournament with 64 wins (in                 sentative resulting states of these 20 shots. The search
78 games), compared to only 34 wins total by P ICK P OCKET.                 method used at this second level differs between the
   This was not enough games to statistically establish the                 early and late stages of the games.
fact that C UE C ARD was the superior agent, and so, after
the tournament, we ran more games between C UE C ARD and                     (a) In the early game, the above process (Steps 1–3) is
P ICK P OCKET2 . In this later match, C UE C ARD won 492-144,                    essentially repeated with smaller constants, return-
clearly establishing that it is the better player.                               ing the average evaluation for the best shot.
                                                                             (b) In the late game, a noiseless search is conducted up
3     C UE C ARD description                                                     to the end of the game, as described in Section 3.4.
C UE C ARD is a complex engineering artifact, and to describe            6. After the representative state evaluations have been ad-
it fully would require more space than we have here. Our goal               justed, a new evaluation for each of the 20 shot variants
is instead to give a good sense of how C UE C ARD works, to                 is generated, and the best variant is chosen.
describe some of its main components, and to isolate for anal-           7. In case the best variant has a value below a certain
ysis factors that may have contributed to C UE C ARD’s suc-                 threshhold, or no feasible shots were generated, C UE -
cess.                                                                       C ARD plays a last-resort shot (see below).
3.1     C UE C ARD overview                                              Last-resort shots are generated by attempting shots in all
                                                                      directions in an attempt to ﬁnd shots that do not foul and
Given a state of the table, C UE C ARD chooses the shot param-
                                                                      hopefully pocket a ball. Generation of shots in this manner
eters to return by following these steps:
                                                                      discovers different types of shots, such as double and triple
    1. For each legal ball and pocket, a set of directions ϕ , each   kick shots, which were not considered during typical shot ex-
       with a minimum velocity v0 , is generated in attempt to        ploration.
       sink the ball into the pocket. In this step we generate           A key facet of performance in a competitive environment is
       both straight-in shots (where the object ball goes directly    reasoning about the opponent. C UE C ARD considers the op-
       into the pocket), more complex shots (involving more           ponent only during evaluation of last-resort shots, while ig-
       than one collision), and special shots designed to dis-        noring the opponent during typical shot selection. This con-
       perse clusters of balls.                                       sideration is not game-theoretic, and affects a relatively small
    2. For each of these (ϕ , v0 ) pairs, discrete velocity values,   component of C UE C ARD, as less than 1% of shots gener-
       vi , between v0 for this shot and the maximum allowed          ated by C UE C ARD utilize the last-resort mechanism. When
       velocity vMAX , are generated. The (ϕ , vi ) pairs that are    evaluating last-resort shots we consider it more likely that
                                                                      the opponent will have the next turn. Because of this, last-
     1 E LIX was written by Marc Goddard.                             resort shots are evaluated by taking into account the value
     2 The authors thank Michael Smith, for making P ICK P OCKET      of the resulting state for both C UE C ARD (vCC ) and the op-
available to us.                                                      ponent (vOPP ). The value of a last-resort shot, vLR , is then

                                                                  1378
vLR = vCC − vOPP . In this manner, a shot which always sinks
a ball and leaves C UE C ARD with good shots will be consid-
ered as valuable as a shot which never sinks a ball, but leaves
the opponent with no available shots.
   It is hard to analyze the contribution of the last-resort
mechanism, as it is used so infrequently. Also, we cannot
simply remove it, since not replacing it with another mech-
anism would certainly lead to worse performance, as there
would be no way for the modiﬁed agent to deal with difﬁcult
situations. In light of this, analysis of the last-resort mecha-
                                                                         Figure 2: Typical table state after C UE C ARD’s break
nism is not included in this paper. As described in the remain-
der of the paper, we picked components which are represen-
tative of the different design aspects (engineering, domain-       section we describe how C UE C ARD deals with a game situa-
speciﬁc and domain-independent), as well as amenable to            tion speciﬁc to billiards: the break shot.
analysis through testing. The following components were               A break shot consists of specifying a location for the cue
selected for analysis: a distributed architecture and reimple-     ball and a shot. C UE C ARD uses a precomputed break shot
mentation of the physics simulator as engineering factors, an      which was calculated via an extensive ofﬂine search over cue-
optimized break shot as a domain-speciﬁc factor, and ﬁnally        ball locations and shot parameters. An ideal break shot would
look-ahead search and a method of clustering the results of        keep the turn and spread the balls out on the table. During
sampling as domain-independent factors. We ﬁrst describe           testing it became clear that these two goals are to some de-
each of these components and then in Section 4 present anal-       gree mutually exclusive. There are break shots which keep
ysis of their contributions to C UE C ARD’s success.               the turn 97% of the time, but do not spread out any balls.
                                                                   Other break shots which spread balls out completely were
3.2   Engineering components                                       at best ~60% successful. C UE C ARD’s break shot put more
As with any search problem, it seems clear that the more time      weight on keeping the turn than spreading out the balls on the
an agent has to explore the problem space, the better the ac-      table, as the latter leaves the opponent in a very good position
tion that the agent will be able to select. “Engineering” com-     if the turn is also lost. C UE C ARD’s break shot keeps the turn
ponents were designed to help C UE C ARD accomplish more           92% of the time, and often spreads out many of the balls.
in the same amount of time. The following factors did this by
either making C UE C ARD more efﬁcient, or by simply mak-          3.4     Domain-independent techniques
ing more time available for C UE C ARD to use.                     Some of the techniques used by C UE C ARD are applicable to
                                                                   other AI domains. These techniques are described here.
Distributed architecture
C UE C ARD was designed to have its computation distributed        Shot sampling and state clustering
across multiple machines, effectively granting itself addi-        Early testing of C UE C ARD showed that the 15 samples used
tional CPU time to compute shots. Speciﬁcally, Steps 3 and 5       by P ICK P OCKET were not enough to consistently choose suc-
are distributed among a cluster of 20 dual-core machines on        cessful shots. However, the consequence of sampling more,
Amazon’s EC2 cluster. Each sub-task is assigned a time limit       without clustering (Step 3d), is that there are a larger num-
and sent to a different machine with a manager coordinating        ber of states resulting from any action (equal to the number
the execution of the sub-tasks. Efﬁciency of this mechanism        of samples), each of which must be expanded at the second
is tracked by C UE C ARD in real time and the time limits are      level of the search (Step 5) to reﬁne the value estimate for the
adjusted accordingly.                                              shot. Thus, any increase in the number of samples requires
                                                                   that more time be spent at the second level to evaluate each
Faster physics engine                                              shot. Thus either fewer shots must be considered, or the sec-
Proﬁles of C UE C ARD’s execution revealed that one of the         ond level of search must be eliminated completely.
major bottlenecks was the physics library, which was pro-             To avoid these problems, C UE C ARD applies a clustering
vided in binary format. To speed up C UE C ARD’s execution         algorithm to the table states resulting from the different sam-
we re-implemented the physics library based on [Leckie and         ples of a single shot. The clustering algorithm works with
Greenspan, 2006], while improving several engineering as-          a state representation that includes the (x, y) coordinates of
pects of the software. This re-implementation resulted in an       each ball on the table, as well as the evaluation of that table
average 5.9× speedup when compared to the P OOL F IZ li-           state. States that, according to a metric in this high- dimen-
brary over several example games. To ensure proper perfor-         sional state space, are sufﬁciently close are combined into
mance, C UE C ARD only uses our physics to simulate the sam-       a "representative state" that can later be expanded. Similar
ples of a shot when the resulting states of the noiseless simu-    sampling/clustering techniques have been previously applied
lated shot on both simulators are sufﬁciently close together.      to protein folding [Singhal et al., 2004]. In our case, the
                                                                   clustering approach offers a dramatic reduction in the num-
3.3   Domain speciﬁc component: break shot                         ber of states that need to be processed at the second level
A successful agent in any domain will require speciﬁc knowl-       of the search. Often, 50 states resulting from a single shot
edge of and optimization for the domain in question. In this       can be clustered into 5 or 10 states, which leaves much more

                                                               1379
                                                                                Win percentage against tournament version
time to evaluate each of those states at the next level. The
additional samples of each shot lead to more robust shot se-
lection. C UE C ARD samples each shot between 20 and 100                                                                    0.55

times, depending on the stage of the game.
                                                                                                                             0.5
Look-ahead search
                                                                                                                            0.45
C UE C ARD uses look-ahead search to plan the shots it takes.
In the early game, it looks two levels deep, using the same                                                                  0.4
evaluation function at each level, similar to what was done by
P ICK P OCKET [Smith, 2007]. In the late game, C UE C ARD                                                                   0.35
evaluates states after the ﬁrst level of search by estimating
                                                                                                                             0.3
the probability that it wins the game from that state. This is
done by conducting a noiseless search to the end of the game,                                                               0.25
with each shot weighted by its estimated success probability.                                                                      100    200     300     400     500   600
                                                                                                                                         Number of seconds per game
When the end of the game is reached, the win probability for
that state is 1. This value is then backed up the search tree to
give value to the states where it is still C UE C ARD’s turn. It is        Figure 3: Effect of allocated time per game on performance
assumed that if a shot doesn’t succeed then the same number
of balls will remain on the table. The opponent’s win prob-
ability for this state is estimated based on a Markov-chain             3 shows the results of these tests. Different numbers of sec-
model of 8-ball, indexed by the number of balls of each side            onds per game were allotted to the single-threaded version of
in play, which was generated from thousands of self-played              our program. Each of these different versions then competed
games.                                                                  against C UE C ARD -TV, to which, as stated previously, was
                                                                        allotted the full 600 seconds. In each case the win percentage
4 Analysis                                                              of the variant program against C UE C ARD -TV is reported.
                                                                        For reference, the win percentage of the full tournament ver-
In this section the previously described components of C UE -           sion running on the 20-machine cluster against C UE C ARD -
C ARD are analyzed and discussed to identify the importance             TV is shown by the dashed line.
of each to C UE C ARD’s success.
                                                                        Faster physics simulator
4.1   Methodology                                                       The reimplemented physics simulator gave an average six-
To isolate each individual component we created versions of             fold speedup per simulation. C UE C ARD uses it instead of
C UE C ARD with the component either modiﬁed or removed.                P OOL F IZ for 97.95% of the shots. Since the physics simula-
Each of these modiﬁed version was tested against the tourna-            tion is the major bottleneck of the system, we would expect
ment version of C UE C ARD, running on a single CPU, with               the overall speedup to be around 5×. We can see from Figure
600 seconds allotted per game. We will refer to this bench-             3 that if we force C UE C ARD to only use P OOL F IZ, that would
mark agent as C UE C ARD -TV. In some cases we also ran                 be like giving the program only 120 seconds per game. From
matches between the modiﬁed versions and the version of                 the data we might expect such a program to have a win per-
P ICK P OCKET that competed in the tournament. In all cases,            centage against C UE C ARD -TV between 40% and 45%. We
we report the win percentages of each program and the stan-             ran a match to test this hypothesis, and indeed, C UE C ARD
dard deviations3(SD) of the results. We have also used hy-              with only P OOL F IZ won 42.4% (±2.68%) of the time (99.8%
pothesis testing to test the statistical signiﬁcance of our re-         signiﬁcance).
sults when indicating that a certain version of our program
performed better than another. These signiﬁcance values4 are            The computing cluster
provided when relevant.                                                 Since C UE C ARD -TV won 45% of the time against the 20
                                                                        CPU version, it is clear that the additional processing power
4.2   Engineering components                                            of the computing cluster was not essential to C UE C ARD’s
In the tournament, each program was allotted 600 seconds per            tournament victory. To conﬁrm this, we ran C UE C ARD -
game for decision-making. The purpose of C UE C ARD’s two               TV against the tournament version of P ICK P OCKET, and
engineering components was to allow the agent to do more                C UE C ARD -TV won 77% of the time (±2%), which is similar
computation in the time it had, either by using more machines           to the win percentage from the tournament.
or by making bottleneck components run faster. In order to                 We conclude that C UE C ARD did gain beneﬁts due to the
determine the effect of these components on C UE C ARD’s vic-           engineering components, but it is unclear that the beneﬁts
tory, we must ﬁrst determine the value of this extra time.              outweigh the costs associated with the methods. Also, the im-
   Separate from the tournament, we ran several tests in an             provement of C UE C ARD is not linear in the amount of time
attempt to capture the value of time to C UE C ARD. Figure              gained. Thus, while each of the engineering components has
   3 √1 , where N is the total number of games played in the match.     value when added individually, when both of the components
    2 N                                                                 are added together the improvement is less than the sum of
   4ϕ
      μ =0.5,σ 2 (w), where w is the win rate of the winning program,   the individual improvements. Due to this fact, in hindsight,
σ = √1 , and ϕ is the normal cdf.                                       we would consider carefully the beneﬁts and cost of adding
     2 N

                                                                    1380
 Agent | break vs. agent | break    Win %      SD                                                         0.55

    CC | CC vs. PP | PP             77.4%     2.0%

                                                                         Win percentage against CueCard
     CC | PP vs. PP | PP            65.4%     2.4%                                                         0.5

    CC | CC vs. PP | CC             69.3%     1.6%
    CC | CC vs. CC | PP             70.1%     5.1%                                                        0.45

        Table 1: Determining break shot contribution                                                       0.4

both engineering components, and perhaps leave at least one                                               0.35

of them out of the system.
                                                                                                             0      50    100     150    200    250     300      350
4.3   Domain speciﬁc component: break shot                                                                       Number of samples per shot at the first level
One stark contrast between P ICK P OCKET and C UE C ARD is
the break shot employed, each of which leads to very different
                                                                     Figure 4: Effect of number of samples on performance
distributions over the possible break shot outcomes. To exam-
ine the contribution of the break shot to C UE C ARD’s success,
we ran four separate test matches. In each test match, tour-      The results are summarized in Figure 4, where win percent-
nament versions of C UE C ARD and P ICK P OCKET were used,        ages against C UE C ARD -TV are shown. We show the data in
with only their break shots modiﬁed. We ﬁrst ran each agent       a graph, to emphasize the relationship between the different
with its own break shot, which recreated the conditions of the    versions tested.
tournament. The results of this match are shown on the top           The performance of C UE C ARD -TV against the versions
line of Table 1. We next had the two agents compete against       using less than 30 samples shows the effect of simply being
each other using the same break shot, ﬁrst P ICK P OCKET’s        able to sample more. C UE C ARD -TV won decisively against
and then C UE C ARD’s. The results of these two matches are       these programs, with an average win percentage of 61 %. Due
on lines 2 and 3 of Table 1. Lastly, we had C UE C ARD com-       to the low number of tests the statistical signiﬁcance of each
pete against itself, where one version had C UE C ARD’s break     result is 97.7%.
shot, and one had P ICK P OCKET’s. The results of this match         For the range between 30-150 samples, which is approxi-
are shown on the bottom line of Table 1. All results are sta-     mately what C UE C ARD varies over, the results are too close
tistically signiﬁcant for the winner.                             to say deﬁnitely which method (constant or variable number
   At ﬁrst glance, comparison of the top and bottom lines         of samples) is better. We can say that if C UE C ARD had a
would indicate the possibility that C UE C ARD’s win over         constant number of samples in the 30-100 range it would not
P ICK P OCKET can be accounted for almost entirely by the         have performed any worse. The simplicity of the constant
difference in break shots. Consideration of the other two         number of samples approach argues for its use over the vari-
matches quickly refutes that, however, as C UE C ARD was able     able method. As the number of samples per shot increases to
to soundly defeat P ICK P OCKET even when both programs           300, the performance does decline. The tradeoff of sampling
were using the same break shot. The fact that the match on        more is that the agent has less time to try different shots. It is
the top line, recreating tournament conditions, is the most       clear from the data that once a certain number of samples has
lopsided in favor of C UE C ARD shows that the break shot did     been reached further samples do not add to the performance
play a large role, accounting for around 10% of the wins. But,    of the agent. After a certain number of samples, the results
with break shots being equal, C UE C ARD was still demon-         of the samples seem to be an accurate enough representation
strably superior, and to explain this, we must examine other      of the possible outcomes of the shot, such that further sam-
components of C UE C ARD.                                         ples don’t give enough information to cause serious changes
                                                                  in decisions and play. The data indicates that this minimum
4.4   Domain-independent techniques                               number of necessary samples for our setting is somewhere
Sampling and clustering                                           between 30 and 50. We conclude that the clustering helped
                                                                  signiﬁcantly by enabling more samples, while the variable
Two aspects of C UE C ARD’s sampling were new contribu-           number of samples gave us no additional advantage.
tions. The ﬁrst, which was made possible by clustering, was
simply that C UE C ARD performed more samples than the 15         Second level of search
which P ICK P OCKET had previously done [Smith, 2007]. The        As described in Section 3.4, the methods used at the second
second aspect was that C UE C ARD varied the number of sam-       level of search differ between C UE C ARD and P ICK P OCKET.
ples performed depending on the stage of the game. To de-         To see if one of these methods gives an advantage over an-
termine the effectiveness of each of these features we ran        other, we ran C UE C ARD -TV against a version of C UE C ARD
C UE C ARD -TV against versions of C UE C ARD that differed       in which the second level is the same as used by P ICK -
only in the number of times they sampled shots at the ﬁrst        P OCKET. The result of this match is shown on the top row of
level of search. In particular, each version was allotted the     Table 2. Our conclusion is that neither method of searching
same amount of time per game. In each case the number of          at the second level gives signiﬁcant advantage over the other,
samples was held constant throughout all stages of the game.      and that C UE C ARD’s new method of searching at the second

                                                              1381
 Agent                Win % vs. C UE C ARD -TV        SD              The lessons learned in this domain can be extended to other
 L2 = PickPocket              49.88%                 1.4%          AI domains. Speciﬁcally, it is hard to predict, when facing a
 Ignore level 2               45.23%                 2.0 %         new and complex domain, which type of agent component
 More level 1                 51.60%                 1.4%          will have the most impact. The experience with C UE C ARD
                                                                   shows that effort should be put into each different type, as
             Table 2: Effect of level 2 of search.                 they can all prove fruitful.
                                                                      In the future, we plan to further explore the role of clus-
level did not contribute to the victory over P ICK P OCKET.        tering in planning, especially compared to its use in other
   This still does not address the usefulness of the level 2       domains. We also plan to examine the relationship between
of search in general. Until now, it has been generally as-         noise level and the value of look-ahead search in billiards,
sumed that in a search space with imperfect heuristic looka-       examining what changes occur as the noise levels change.
head search would be beneﬁcial. To see if this is true in the      Similarly, in contrast with the idealized view of game the-
domain of computational pool, we did several things. First,        ory, we currently do little in the way of opponent modeling.
we observed that the second level of search actually changes       We would like to see how the need for opponent modeling
the decision made by the ﬁrst level of the search only 18.33%      changes with changes in the noise level. With all these open
of the time. We also ran two different test matches to see         issues billiards presents a great opportunity to develop and
if running level 2 actually improves the decisions made by         apply a variety of AI techniques and methods.
C UE C ARD. In each match, a modiﬁed version of C UE C ARD
competed against C UE C ARD -TV (which utilizes level 2). In       References
the ﬁrst modiﬁed version everything remained the same, but         [Billiards Congress of America, 1992] Billiards Congress of
the agent simply ignored the results of level 2, making its de-       America. Billiards: The Ofﬁcial Rules and Records Book.
cision based only on the level 1 search result. The result of         The Lyons Press, New York, New York, 1992.
this match, shown on the second row of Table 2, shows that         [Billings et al., 2002] Darse Billings, Aaron Davidson,
running level 2 after level 1 does improve the performance of
                                                                      Jonathan Schaeffer, and Duane Szafron. The challenge of
the program (with statistical signiﬁcance of 99.1%).
                                                                      poker. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Journal, 134:201–240, 2002.
   In the second modiﬁed version, instead of simply ignoring
level 2, we took the time that would have been spent on level      [Greenspan, 2006] Michael Greenspan. PickPocket wins the
2 and spent it exploring more shots at the ﬁrst level of search.      pool tournament. International Computer Games Associ-
The results of this match are shown on the bottom row of Ta-          ation Journal, 29:152–156, 2006.
ble 2. Interestingly, we see that running more level 1 is at       [Korf, 1995] Rich Korf. Heuristic evaluation functions in
least as valuable as running level 2, or at least the two meth-       artiﬁcial intelligence search algorithms. Minds and Ma-
ods are indistinguishable by the 1256 games we ran between            chines, 5(4):489–498, 1995.
them. This leaves unresolved the issue of whether a second         [Latombe, 1991] Jean-Claude Latombe. Robot Motion Plan-
level of search should be performed at all.                           ning. Springer, 1991.
   Analysis of P ICK P OCKET [Smith, 2007] also failed to
show conclusively that a second level of search was help-          [Leckie and Greenspan, 2006] Will Leckie and Michael
ful. Interestingly, the tournament noise levels were chosen           Greenspan. An Event-Based Pool Physics Simulator, pages
in an attempt to emphasize high-level planning and strategy.          247–262. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer,
A second level of search would seemingly be invaluable in a           2006.
domain which rewards good high-level planning. This choice         [Levy and Newborn, 1991] David Levy and Monty New-
has yet to be supported by experimental data. In the future           born. How Computers Play Chess. Computer Science
we plan on speciﬁcally investigating this issue, seeking to ei-       Press, 1991.
ther support or contradict the reasoning used to choose the        [Singhal et al., 2004] Nina Singhal, Christopher D. Snow,
tournament noise level.                                               and Vijay S. Pande. Using path sampling to build better
                                                                      Markovian state models: Predicting the folding rate and
5 Conclusions                                                         mechanism of a tryptophan zipper beta hairpin. Journal of
Our analysis of C UE C ARD focused on three different types           Chemical Physics, 121:415–425, 2004.
of components: engineering, domain-speciﬁc and domain-             [Smith, 2007] Michael Smith. PickPocket: A computer bil-
independent. We summarize our conclusions as follows:                 liards shark. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 171:1069–1091, 2007.
  • The two largest contributors to C UE C ARD’s success,          [Stone, 2007] Peter Stone. Intelligent Autonomous Robotics:
    each with roughly the same magnitude of impact, were              A Robot Soccer Case Study. Synthesis Lectures on Artiﬁ-
    the break shot and increased number of samples.                   cial Intelligence and Machine Learning. Morgan & Clay-
  • The engineering aspects, which increased the time avail-          pool Publishers, 2007.
    able to C UE C ARD, had a smaller impact on its success.       [Wellman et al., 2007] Michael P. Wellman, Amy Green-
                                                                      wald, and Peter Stone. Autonomous Bidding Agents:
  • Look-ahead search and the variable number of shot sam-
                                                                      Strategies and Lessons from the Trading Agent Competi-
    ples had no effect, either positive or negative, on C UE -
                                                                      tion. MIT Press, 2007.
    C ARD’s performance.

                                                               1382
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/application_of_high_speed_imaging_to_determine_the_dynamics_of_billiards.pdf
title: Application of high-speed imaging to determine the dynamics of billiards
topics: collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills, robotics_and_computation, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
Application of high-speed imaging to determine the dynamics of billiards
         S. Mathavan,a兲 M. R. Jackson,b兲 and R. M. Parkinc兲
         Mechatronics Research Group, Wolfson School of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering,
         Loughborough University, Loughborough LE11 3UZ, United Kingdom
         共Received 19 December 2008; accepted 2 June 2009兲
         In spite of interest in the dynamics of the billiards family of games 共for example, pool and snooker兲,
         experiments using present-day inexpensive and easily accessible cameras have not been reported.
         We use a single high-speed camera and image processing techniques to track the trajectory of
         snooker balls to 1 mm accuracy. Successive ball positions are used to measure the dynamical
         parameters involved in snooker. Values for the rolling and the sliding coefficients of friction were
         found. The cushion-ball impact was studied for impacts perpendicular to the cushion. The separation
         angles and separation velocities after an oblique collision were measured and compared with
         predicted values. Our measurement technique is a simple, reliable, fast, and nonintrusive method,
         which can be used to test the numerous theories for the dynamics of billiards. The addition of a spin
         tracking element would further broaden its capabilities. © 2009 American Association of Physics Teachers.
         关DOI: 10.1119/1.3157159兴

I. INTRODUCTION                                                            of the changes in the phases of the ball motion allows us to
                                                                           measure the parameters more accurately than has been done.
   Pool and snooker are popular billiard games. Billiard                   The use of speed-time plots also allows us to measure the
games involve very subtle physics and have been of interest                effects of special collision between two balls, such as “over-
to the physics community for over 200 years. The first ex-                 spinning,” which has only been qualitatively described in the
tensive treatment of billiards was by Coriolis in 1835.1 Other             literature.
works, such as those of Wallace and Schroeder,2 Salazar and
Sanchez-Lavega,3 and de la Torre Juárez,4 address the dy-                  II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
namics of billiards. There have been both theory and experi-
mental works5 on the dynamics.                                                A Riley Renaissance type snooker table with dimensions
   Special apparatus have been used for the measurements in                of 10⫻ 5 ft2 was installed in our laboratory 共see Fig. 1兲. This
most instances. For example, glass and textured black for-                 brand is the official table of the World Snooker Association
mica was used to replace the table-felt in studying the colli-             and has been used for its professional snooker tournaments
sions between billiard balls.2,5 Tracking techniques such as               since 1992.
spreading talcum powder on the surface of the table have                      The tables used in pool and snooker are almost identical,
also been employed. Many of these techniques affect the                    except that the pool table has larger pockets compared to the
dynamics that is being studied. Although Bayes and Scott5                  size of a pool ball. At the start of a game there are 21 colored
used a Polaroid camera and a stroboscope to track the balls,               balls worth various points and a white cue ball at predefined
they did not base their results on this setup probably due to              places on the table.
the poor accuracy of the cameras in the 1960s. As recent as                   A machine vision camera was mounted on the ceiling,
1994, rudimentary techniques were still used to estimate the               right above the snooker table, looking vertically downward
physical parameters in billiard dynamics. For example,                     共Fig. 1兲. A single camera is sufficient to capture the dynamics
Marlow6 used a meter stick and a stop watch to measure                     because the dynamics is confined to the table surface. The
friction coefficients.                                                     color camera is PixeLINK PL-B776F with 3.15⫻ 106 pixel
   Today’s technologies allow the high resolution tracking of              resolution. The camera is connected to a host personal com-
objects. High-speed tracking technologies are extensively                  puter via FIREWIRE. For the region of interest option the cam-
used in sports such as football, tennis, and cricket.7,8                   era is capable of capturing up to 1000 frames per second
Alciatore9 used high-speed video capture to visualize the dy-              共fps兲. This feature of the camera was used whenever it was
namics in the game of pool. Alciatore10 also used infrared                 necessary to analyze the dynamics at finer temporal resolu-
imaging to visualize the collision points. However, he did not             tions. The camera is fitted with a wide-angle lens to capture
analyze the images to extract the physical parameters in-                  the whole table from the limited available headspace be-
volved in the dynamics. Cross11 employed a video camera to                 tween the snooker table and the ceiling. The table area is
measure the ball velocity and ball spin using an overhead                  imaged to a 1 mm spatial resolution with the current setup of
camera and analyzed squirt dynamics in a cue ball suspended                the camera.
as a pendulum bob. Researchers involved in robotic billiards                  To verify that the measurements made by the camera are
have also used overhead cameras to locate the static ball                  accurate, some distance measurements were also made with
positions on the table.12–15                                               a meter stick. For this purpose two rectangular blocks with a
   In this paper we use high-speed camera based tracking to                height of the ball radius and with circular white patterns on
measure the characteristics of the interactions between the                their top surfaces were placed at two locations on the table.
cue ball, table, and object ball. Accurate spatial and temporal            Circular patterns of diameter of 52.4 mm 共the ball diameter兲
tracking of the ball and the use of speed-time plot of the balls           were used so that the camera and the image processing algo-
allow us to distinguish the different phases of ball dynamics,             rithm would treat them as balls. The distance between their
such as sliding, rolling, and impulses. The accurate detection             centers was obtained using the camera and the meter stick.

788       Am. J. Phys. 77 共9兲, September 2009        http://aapt.org/ajp            © 2009 American Association of Physics Teachers    788
                                                                               Fig. 3. The pinhole camera model shows how a real world point X is pro-
                                                                               jected as X⬘ on the camera image plane uv, through the optical center C of
                                                                               the lens. Also note how the camera frame x⬘y ⬘z⬘ is fixed to the optical center
                                                                               of the lens.
Fig. 1. Snooker table and ceiling-mounted machine vision camera in the
mechatronics laboratory. Note the headspace and the vertical mount of the
camera to look perpendicularly down at the table.
                                                                               experiments were performed in half of the table area to ob-
                                                                               tain better spatial resolution from the camera. The image blur
                                                                               due to fast moving balls was minimized by selecting the
We used this method because it was very cumbersome to                          lowest possible camera shutter opening time. Image se-
physically measure the center distance between two snooker                     quences with high image blurs were not analyzed. Quantifi-
balls because the balls change position with the slightest                     cation was done by counting the number of pixels in a blur
touch. This procedure was repeated for several random posi-                    and then comparing it with the number of pixels found in a
tions of the blocks almost covering the whole imaged area of                   stationary ball.
the table. The differences in the measurements by the two
methods were found to be at most 2 mm, validating the re-
sults from the imaging system. The video and image han-                        B. Image processing
dling and the image processing were performed using MAT-                          An image processing program was written to execute the
LAB.                                                                           following operations. The video was captured and then split
                                                                               into image frames. The images were then converted into gray
A. Methods                                                                     scale images. Each of these gray scale images were then
                                                                               transformed to binary images using an appropriate threshold
   Before measurements could be made on the images from a                      value of the image intensity. A treatment of these concepts
camera, two calibrations were done. The intrinsic camera                       can be found in textbooks on digital image processing such
calibration was performed to correct for the lens distortion                   as that of Gonzalez and Woods.18 Then the image processing
that is present in wide-angle lenses 关see Fig. 2共a兲兴. The cam-                 program to extract the ball centroid was executed. Two func-
era calibration toolbox from the Computational Vision Group                    tions from the MATLAB Image Processing Toolbox called bw-
at Caltech was used in conjunction with MATLAB to calibrate                    label and regionprops were used to extract the ball from the
the camera; for a detailed description of the procedure, see                   image, thus determining its centroid in pixels. The real world
Ref. 16.                                                                       coordinates of the ball centroid are obtained using the trans-
   The MATLAB toolbox also incorporates an extrinsic cali-                     formation matrices Rc and Tc from the extrinsic calibration
bration element. The extrinsic calibration procedure enables                   procedure. The time stamping of these values based on the
metric measurements to be made from the values given in                        camera frame rate enables us to calculate the velocities and
terms of pixels. This procedure provides the translation and                   accelerations of the ball.
rotation matrices that relate the real world coordinate system
to the image plane 共see Fig. 3兲. The equation for the trans-
                                                                               III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
formation between a point in the world frame xyz to its cor-
responding image point in the camera fame x⬘y ⬘z⬘ is x⬘                           The tracked cue ball is shown with its initial position on
= Rcⴱx + Tc, where Rc and Tc are the rotation and translation                  the snooker table in Fig. 4. The spatial separation between
matrices, respectively.17                                                      the successive tracked centroids indicates the variation in the
   A real world coordinate system was selected such that it                    ball’s velocity.
was fixed to the snooker table so that two of its axes lie along
the two perpendicular edges of the table and both x and y lie
on the imaginary plane that is created by the ball centers 关see
Fig. 2共b兲兴, which is 26.2 mm above the table surface. The

                                                                               Fig. 4. The tracked cue ball positions 共the centroid of the ball is shown by
Fig. 2. 共a兲 Distorted and 共b兲 corrected images of the half table 共note the     the white markers兲 are superimposed on the image at the start of the track-
barrel distortion due to the wide-angle lens兲 with the checkerboard pattern,   ing, also showing the initial cue ball location 共four consecutive impacts with
for extrinsic camera calibration, placed on the table.                         two parallel cushions are shown兲.

789         Am. J. Phys., Vol. 77, No. 9, September 2009                                                       Mathavan, Jackson, and Parkin              789
                                                                                    ball’s velocity decreases rapidly during what is known as the
                                                                                    sliding phase, and then the ball starts to roll. Reference 3
                                                                                    showed that the ball starts to roll immediately only when the
                                                                                    ball is hit horizontally at a height of 7R / 5 from the table
                                                                                    surface. In Fig. 6 the velocity gradient during the rolling
                                                                                    phase gives the value of the deceleration due to rolling fric-
                                                                                    tion. Different shots were tracked and the deceleration during
                                                                                    the rolling phase was found to be 0.124– 0.126 m / s2. The
                                                                                    rolling friction coefficient, which is usually expressed as a
                                                                                    fraction of the gravitational acceleration 9.81 m / s2, is
                                                                                    0.0127–0.0129. Marlow6 suggested a range of 0.011–0.024
                                                                                    for pocket billiards 共pool兲 and a mean value of 0.016. Al-
Fig. 5. The ball rolling on the table. It shows the forces that are acting on the   though the physical properties of the ball and table are dif-
ball while it is rolling. Note the reaction force from the table S, which is a      ferent in pool and snooker, there is no obvious reason for this
combined effect of the “regular” normal reaction from the table and, most           excessive variation 共more than 100% of the lower value兲
importantly, due to of the table-felt under the weight of the moving ball. The
horizontal component of S, S sin ␤, decelerates the ball.
                                                                                    obtained in pool with Marlow’s measurements. The only
                                                                                    plausible explanation is that the meter stick and stop watch
                                                                                    measurement method used by Marlow is prone to error. Al-
                                                                                    though Williams21 claimed that the nap of the table-felt af-
A. Ball motion against surface friction on the table
                                                                                    fects the ball motion, depending on whether its motion is
   When there is no relative velocity between the ball and the                      toward the top cushion or away from it, we did not find any
table at their contact point, the ball is said to roll on the table.                evidence to support this claim.
During the rolling the linear and angular velocities of the                            When there is a relative velocity between the ball and the
ball, V and ⍀, respectively, satisfy the relation V = R⍀, with                      table at their point of contact, the ball is said to slip on the
R the ball radius. Because the table-felt is deformable and the                     table. In the sliding phase V = R⍀. For a theoretical treatment
ball is rigid, the table surface deforms when the ball is in                        of all the possible cases of ball motion immediately after the
motion as shown in Fig. 5. Hence the ball makes contact                             cue impact, see Ref. 3. The friction that exists during the
with the table over an extended area. According to Ref. 19                          sliding motion 共the sliding coefficient of friction兲 usually de-
this deformation is independent of V. The table cloth defor-                        pends on the sliding velocity of the ball. The ball speed-time
mation results in a normal reaction force S from the table at                       plot given in Fig. 6 shows that the sliding friction is much
an angle ␤ with the vertical, inclined from the moving direc-                       larger than the rolling friction, disappears within a very short
tion of the ball as shown in Fig. 5. For an extensive treatment                     time interval, and quickly diminishes with the velocity. An-
of this deformation, see Refs. 19 and 20.                                           other interesting observation from this plot is that after the
   According to Fig. 5, the reaction force S has a horizontal                       ball has started its rolling motion, it starts to slide again 共note
component equal to S sin ␤, which opposes the ball motion.                          the speed gradients immediately after the impacts兲 when it
Generally the reaction force S does not go through the cen-                         collides with the cushion 共table wall/rail兲 because the cush-
troid of the ball, and hence there is a torque acting in the                        ion impact violates the V = R⍀ rolling condition. Once V
opposite direction to that of the angular velocity ⍀, resulting                     = R⍀ is reached again, the ball goes into the pure rolling
in angular deceleration. The rolling friction coefficient does                      mode.
not change with the ball’s velocity and is a constant because                          From the analysis of the speed of the tracked ball, the
it depends only on the surface properties of the table-felt and                     sliding friction coefficient was found to be in the range of
the geometry and mass of the ball.19                                                1.75– 2.40 m / s2 共0.178–0.245 in dimensionless units兲.
   Figure 6 shows the variation in the ball’s velocity with                         These values were obtained for the ball motion along random
respect to time. Once the impulse is delivered to the ball, the                     directions on the table. Marlow6 calculated a dimensionless
                                                                                    value of 0.2 for pool using the rolling coefficient value of
                                                                                    0.016. An independent measurement was not performed be-
                                                                                    cause only a meter stick and a stop watch were available.
                                                                                    Witters and Duymelinck22 used stroboscopic illumination to
                                                                                    photograph a decelerating pool 共not snooker兲 ball. They
                                                                                    found that when the ball velocity increases from zero, the
                                                                                    friction coefficient approaches 0.21 from a value of 0.14.
                                                                                    Such a variation could not be verified from our experiments.
                                                                                       The sliding friction is 15–20 times larger than the rolling
                                                                                    friction. Also, during the sliding phase some rolling action
                                                                                    will simultaneously take place, as the displacement effect,
                                                                                    shown in Fig. 5, is always present at the ball-table interface.
                                                                                    Due to its comparatively small magnitude 共approximately
                                                                                    5%兲, it is usually neglected, and the motion is treated as pure
                                                                                    sliding.

                                                                                    B. Ball-cushion interaction
Fig. 6. The speed-time plot for the ball showing all the different phenomena
involved from the video captured at 42 fps 共the complete motion profile                To visualize and analyze the impulse dynamics between
until the ball comes to the rest is not shown here兲.                                the ball and the cushion, high-speed image capturing experi-

790          Am. J. Phys., Vol. 77, No. 9, September 2009                                                      Mathavan, Jackson, and Parkin       790
                                                                                  If we assume that the ball had gone into pure rolling mode
                                                                               before the impact, we can determine the top spin of the ball
                                                                               from ⍀ = V / R. Thus the incident ball velocity V is the only
                                                                               independent variable involved, and the velocity drop during
                                                                               the impact can be correlated with V.
                                                                                  Figure 8 shows the velocity plot obtained from a high-
                                                                               speed video captured at 150 fps. The velocity plot was used
                                                                               to determine if the ball was rolling just before it hit the
                                                                               cushion. The gradient of the speed-time plot was used to
                                                                               determine this, as shown in Fig. 8. Results that were obtained
Fig. 7. Bounce of the cue ball off the rail. The ball location depicts its     for 31 such shots into the rails, almost satisfying the condi-
position as it approached the rail. The frame rate is 120 fps, and an imagi-   tions of no-sidespin and that of pure rolling, are given in
nary continuous white line shows the approximate location of the cushion.
                                                                               Fig. 9.
                                                                                  From Fig. 9 we see that the relation between the rebound
                                                                               and incident speeds is almost linear for the incident velocity
ments with ⬎100 fps for small regions of interest were per-                    in the range of 0.28–3.5 m/s 共the typical range of ball veloci-
formed. The impulse of the cue ball on the cushion depends                     ties in the game兲. A best fit straight line for the rebound-
on factors such as the speed at which it collides with the                     incident speed data gives a coefficient of restitution of 0.818
cushion surface, the incident angle with respect to the cush-                  for this velocity range. The results are more closely fit by the
ion surface, the amount of spin of the ball, the physical char-                second-order polynomial y = −0.0877x2 + 1.131x − 0.0953,
acteristics of the ball and the cushion, and the parameters                    where x is the incident velocity and y is the rebound velocity.
involved in the interaction between the ball and the cushion                   These results are not valid for a general ball-cushion impulse
such as the coefficient of restitution and the surface friction.               but are applicable only under the conditions of no-sidespin
   Spin on the ball changes the impact characteristics drasti-                 and pure rolling motion prior to the impulse. We believe that
cally. Ball spin is difficult to quantify with our experimental                the ideal variation between the rebound and incident speeds
setup and methodology. Sidespin changes the postimpulse                        should be linear and the reduction in the coefficient of resti-
cue ball path significantly; the interested reader is directed to              tution at higher incident speeds is due to cushion deforma-
Ref. 23 or Ref. 9. The ball-cushion interaction is a case of                   tion. The gradient of the plot at lower incident speeds is
multiple impacts, both normal and tangential, the latter due                   around 0.910, and this value shall be valid under the assump-
to the force of friction, with one component normal to the                     tion of a rigid cushion.
cushion surface, and the other two perpendicular frictional                       Marlow6 reported that the coefficient of restitution for rails
impacts from the cushion wall. Derivations of the dynamics                     in a billiard table is 0.55 but did not give much detail about
for general impact are not available.                                          the experimental procedure. He compared his results with the
   For this reason we conducted experiments on shots with-                     values suggested by Coriolis1 and concluded that they agree
out considerable sidespin. Care was taken so that a shot was                   closely.6 The cushion height for snooker is 36 mm, with the
directed perpendicular to the rails 共cushions兲 as much as pos-                 ball radius equal to 26 mm, which is close to the height of
sible. Whenever the cue ball is played perpendicular to the                    1.4 times ball radius found in pool. Thus the cushion and
rails, if it does not have any sidespin and should bounce back                 ball geometry is almost identical in pool and snooker. It is
along the same path along which it approached the rail. This                   possible that Marlow considered the rebound ball velocity at
criterion was used to ensure that the shots did not impart a                   the end of the sliding phase rather than the correct one im-
considerable sidespin on the cue ball. Figure 7共a兲 shows a                     mediately after the impulse. Then the coefficient of restitu-
perpendicular shot with no sidespin, and Fig. 7共b兲 shows a                     tion for the shot could be 0.63, but this result has no physical
perpendicular incoming shot that apparently has some side-                     meaning.
spin, which results in the ball rebounding to the right side.
For the rebound analysis the shot shown in Fig. 7共b兲 was not
used, and only the one shown in Fig. 7共a兲 was used. The
no-sidespin condition ensures that there is only one unknown
in the form of top/back spin.

                                                                               Fig. 9. The variation in the rebound velocity versus the incidence velocity.
                                                                               At lower incident velocities the variation is almost linear. However, at
                                                                               higher incident velocities the rebound velocities tend to level off, quite
      Fig. 8. The tracked results for a ball-cushion impulse 共at 150 fps兲.     possibly as the cushion is not rigid at higher incident speeds.

791           Am. J. Phys., Vol. 77, No. 9, September 2009                                                    Mathavan, Jackson, and Parkin            791
                                                                                 also observed in the ball collision with a cushion; see Fig.
                                                                                 10共a兲兴. Figure 10共b兲 gives an idea of how this behavior is
                                                                                 influenced by the incident velocity of the cue ball. Similarly,
                                                                                 the object ball also starts to slip immediately after the im-
                                                                                 pact. Once the slipping phase has stopped, both balls go into
                                                                                 rolling motion, and the curved path of the cue ball is then
                                                                                 directed along the tangent line to the curve. Reference 2
                                                                                 analyzed this phenomenon and showed that the velocities for
Fig. 10. The effect of table friction on the cue ball path for an oblique        the postcollision and postsliding phases of the object ball are
collision 共from Ref. 2兲. 共a兲 The parameters involved in an oblique collision.    共see their notation in Fig. 10兲
共b兲 The cue ball path for different precollision cue ball speeds under rolling
conditions.                                                                           VO = 75 V cos ␪ ,

                                                                                      ␪O = ␪ ,                                                             共1兲
C. Impact between balls                                                          and for the cue ball is
                                                                                      VC = 75 V冑 5 sin2 ␪ + 25
   If the approaching and separating velocities of two balls                                       9        4
                                                                                                               ,
lie along the line connecting the centers of the balls, then the
impact is said to be frontal or head-on. Impacts occur in two
dimensions in billiards as oblique collisions, and the frontal
impact is a special case.
                                                                                      ␪C = tan−1   冋共  sin ␪ cos ␪
                                                                                                        sin2 ␪+
                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                5兲   册.                                    共2兲

   Amateur billiards players use the 90° rule9,10 to visualize                   They defined ␤ = b / D as the fractional impact parameter,
the postcollision trajectories of the colliding balls. It states                 where D is the ball diameter and b is the separation of the
that the balls will separate at 90° after an oblique collision                   ball centers in the direction perpendicular to the incident ball
共see Fig. 10 for the predicted ideal directions of travels兲. It is               velocity V. Also note that ␤ = sin ␪.
also assumed that the cue ball will immediately stop after a                        Plots of angles ␪o, ␪c, and ␪o + ␪c versus the impact param-
frontal collision. In snooker the cue ball and all object balls                  eter are shown in Fig. 12. The experimental values agree
have the same mass. It can be easily shown by momentum                           with the theoretical predictions in most instances, but ␪o de-
conservation that the 90° rule only holds when the coefficient                   viates more from its theoretical value at high fractional im-
of restitution between the balls is one 共that is, the balls are                  pact values. The reason is unknown, and we do not know if
purely elastic兲. The angular velocity of the cue ball 共in the                    factors such as spin affect collisions for very oblique colli-
form of the side/top spin兲 when it collides with the object                      sions. A possible explanation is that at high values of b, an
ball also affects the postcollision velocities and the directions                excessive amount of sidespin is imparted to the object ball,
of separation for the balls. The friction present between the                    which changes its path from what is derived in Ref. 2. This
colliding balls has also been shown to affect the postcollision                  phenomenon also raises questions about whether sidespin af-
motion.24 Bayes and Scott5 employed a spring loaded cue                          fects its speed or direction of travel.
launcher and two pool balls on a felt-covered table to exam-                        In billiards sidespin is considered to be independent of the
ine this effect. They used a stroboscope and a camera to                         linear speed of the ball because it is assumed that the ball
determine the subsequent ball paths and found that the angle                     makes a point contact with the table. If both the contacting
was around 67°. There is no data on how much spin the ball                       surfaces are extremely rigid, this assumption would be valid.
had at the time of impact, which is known to affect the col-                     For billiards the rigid table-top is covered by a soft felt. Thus
lision dynamics. They also tested the ball on various glass                      a considerably rigid billiard ball sinks into the felt, making
surfaces and found that the collision angle approaches 90° as                    contact over a finite region of the ball’s surface. Hence we
the surface becomes smoother 共in soapy glass it reached                          suspect that the ball exhibits disklike properties. For a flat
89.9°兲. Thus table friction creates some unpredictable behav-                    disk, such as an ice-hockey puck, its linear motion and its
ior in the ball collision.
   The tracked results for the cue ball and an object ball
collision are shown in Fig. 11. We see that the temporal
resolution of the tracking is sufficient to capture the deflec-
tions in its postimpact trajectory. The reason for the curva-
ture in the path of the cue ball is that it starts to slip imme-
diately after the impact 关a similar slipping phenomenon was

                                                                                 Fig. 12. Theoretical and measured deflection angles for the cue and object
                                                                                 balls versus the fractional impact parameter ␤. The symbols 䊏, 䉱, and ⽧
Fig. 11. Tracking results for a collision between the cue ball and an object     represent ␪c, ␪o, and ␪c + ␪o, respectively. Continuous lines show the respec-
ball at 45 fps.                                                                  tive predictions.

792          Am. J. Phys., Vol. 77, No. 9, September 2009                                                             Mathavan, Jackson, and Parkin        792
                                                                                     measurements is found to be around 10%. We do not know
                                                                                     whether this error is also induced by the effect of sidespin on
                                                                                     the collision between two balls. The sidespin of the ball was
                                                                                     not taken into consideration in Ref. 2. There is reason to
                                                                                     believe that the friction between the cue ball and the object
                                                                                     ball will introduce tangential force components at the colli-
                                                                                     sion point, which would impart a sidespin onto the object
                                                                                     ball, even though the values of these tangential force com-
                                                                                     ponents may be small.
                                                                                        During impulse there will be a relative velocity between
                                                                                     the cue ball and object ball along the vertical due to the
                                                                                     angular velocity 共top spin兲 in the natural roll of the cue ball
Fig. 13. A typical speed variation in the cue ball and object ball near impact.
                                                                                     prior to the impact. This relative velocity will introduce a
It shows how both the cue ball and the object ball start to slip on the table        tangential friction force during the time of impulse on the
immediately after their collision. The cue ball speed plot also shows how the        cue ball as well as on the object ball. This force will induce
cue ball is accelerated after the impact.                                            a spin on the cue ball about its frontal velocity axis, produc-
                                                                                     ing an effect equivalent to a massé shot 共a shot played with
                                                                                     an elevated cue stick兲. For a massé shot a ball is known to
rotation 共it only has a side-rotation, which is analogous to the                     move along a curved path instead of on a straight line. This
sidespin of the ball兲 are always coupled.25 That is, the rota-                       correction should also be added to the prediction in Ref. 2.
tional motion and linear motion of a disk will end at exactly                        These observations and the evidence presented in Fig. 12 and
the same time.25 Thus there are some characteristics of the                          Table I should motivate a new theory for the collision be-
disklike motion found in billiard ball motion. One observa-                          tween two balls, which involves the frictional forces between
tion that supports this claim is that we never see the ball                          the balls that are present during the impulse.
continue to rotate about the vertical axis 共that is, sidespin兲
after its linear motion is stopped. The coupling of linear and
rotational motions is readily apparent in the game of pool
where the balls have a number or other pattern painted on
their surface.
                                                                                     IV. CONCLUSIONS
   Wallace and Schroeder2 did not experimentally validate
the velocity relations found in Eqs. 共1兲 and 共2兲 because their
tracking method could record only the positions and not the                             High-speed video capture using a single machine vision
time stampings. We use the velocity plots for both colliding                         camera was found to give good results in determining the
balls to validate these equations. As shown in Fig. 13, the                          dynamics involved in snooker. The rolling coefficient of fric-
incident velocity is measured right at impact. The gradient,                         tion was found to be between 0.124 and 0.126 m / s2. The
typical for the pure rolling motion, as discussed, was used as                       sliding friction value is in the range of 1.75– 2.40 m / s2.
the criteria for detecting the time at which the ball starts to                      One-dimensional ball-cushion collisions were also analyzed,
roll 共or stops slipping兲. The detected times are shown with                          and the mean coefficient of restitution was determined. Both
their respective velocity symbols in Fig. 13. We observe that                        frontal and oblique collisions between the balls were ana-
the cue ball accelerates right after the collision. This accel-                      lyzed. Predictions of separation angles and velocities were
eration occurs because the collision greatly reduces only the                        tested experimentally and close agreement was found.
linear velocity and not the angular velocity, and thus the cue                          Some experiments could not be performed. One such ex-
ball goes into a sliding condition with excess top spin 共over-                       periment would look at the general impact of the ball with
spinning兲. This excess top spin is then converted into linear                        the cushion. The inability to perform such experiments is
velocity by the action of the sliding force, which in this case                      mainly due to the difficulty of determining the amount of
acts in the same direction as the ball velocity, increasing the                      spin on the ball using the camera. To track the ball spin in
latter.                                                                              football and golf, researchers have used marked patterns on
   The results are given in Table I for five such shots involv-                      the ball surface. Some interferometer based techniques have
ing impacts. The maximum error between the theory and the                            also been used for this purpose.

                        Table I. The postimpact speed theoretical predictions 共Ref. 2兲 and the measured values from ball tracking. V is
                        the incoming cue ball speed, ␪ is the cut angle for oblique collision, Vo and ␪o are the postcollision and postslip
                        direction of travel and speed for the object ball, and Vc and ␪c are the postcollision and postslip direction of
                        travel and speed of the cue ball.

                          V         ␪     Measured Vc      Measured Vo      Theoretical Vc   Theoretical Vo     Error in Vc   Error in Vo
                        共m/s兲      共°兲       共m/s兲            共m/s兲             共m/s兲            共m/s兲             共%兲           共%兲

                        1.539    33.83        0.816            0.836              0.932           0.913           12.4            8.43
                        1.032    26.36        0.520            0.629              0.529           0.660            1.70           4.70
                        1.364    40.52        0.925            0.700              0.934           0.740            0.964          5.40
                        1.731    46.50        1.275            0.787              1.301           0.851            2.00           7.52
                        0.942    18.05        0.365            0.581              0.388           0.640            5.93           9.22

793          Am. J. Phys., Vol. 77, No. 9, September 2009                                                            Mathavan, Jackson, and Parkin   793
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS                                                                       76 共3兲, 205–212 共2008兲.
                                                                                  12
                                                                                     F. Long, J. Herland, M.-C. Tessier, D. Naulls, A. Roth, G. Roth, and M.
   The authors are indebted to the anonymous reviewers for                           Greenspan, “Robotic pool: An experiment in automatic potting,” in Pro-
their insightful, critical, and enthusiastic comments that re-                       ceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
sulted in an improved manuscript.                                                    and Systems, Sendai, Japan, 2004, pp. 2520–2525.
                                                                                  13
                                                                                     A. W. Moore, D. J. Hill, and M. P. Johnson, “An empirical investigation
                                                                                     of brute force to choose features, smoothers and function approximators,”
 a兲
   Electronic mail: s.mathavan@lboro.ac.uk                                           in Computational Learning Theory and Natural Learning Systems 3: Se-
 b兲
   Electronic mail: m.r.jackson@lboro.ac.uk                                          lecting Good Models 共MIT, Cambridge , MA, 1995兲, pp. 361–379.
c兲                                                                                14
   Electronic mail: r.m.parkin@lboro.ac.uk                                           S. W. Shu, “Automating skills using a robot snooker player,” Ph.D. the-
 1
   G.-G. Coriolis, Théorie Mathémathique des Effets du Jeu de Billard                sis, University of Bristol, 1994.
   共Carilian-Goeury, Paris, 1835兲 translated by David Nadler 关Mathematical        15
                                                                                     M. E. Alian, S. E. Shouraki, M. T. M. Shalmani, P. Karimian, and P.
   Theory of Spin, Friction, and Collision in the Game of Billiards 共David           Sabzmeydani, “Roboshark: A gantry pool player,” 35th International
   Nadler, USA, 2005兲兴.                                                              Symposium on Robotics, Paris, France 共2004兲 共www.cs.sfu.ca/
 2
   R. E. Wallace and M. C. Schroeder, “Analysis of billiard ball collisions in       ~psabzmey/personal/publ/papers/alian_roboshark_isr04.pdf兲.
   two dimensions,” Am. J. Phys. 56 共9兲, 815–819 共1988兲.                          16
                                                                                     J. Y. Bouguet, Camera calibration toolbox for MATLAB
 3
   A. Salazar and A. Sanchez-Lavega, “Motion of a ball on a rough hori-              共www.vision.caltech.edu/bouguetj兲.
   zontal surface after being struck by a tapering rod,” Eur. J. Phys. 11,        17
                                                                                     J. Heikkilä and O. Silvén, “A four-step camera calibration procedure with
   228–232 共1990兲.                                                                   implicit image correction,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society
 4
   M. de la Torre Juárez, “The effect of impulsive forces on a system with
                                                                                     Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 共CVPR’97兲,
   friction: the example of the billiard game,” Eur. J. Phys. 15 共4兲, 184–190
                                                                                     San Juan, Puerto Rico, 1997, pp. 1106–1112.
   共1994兲.                                                                        18
 5                                                                                   R. C. Gonzalez and R. E. Woods, Digital Image Processing 共Prentice-
   J. H. Bayes and W. T. Scott, “Billiard-ball collision experiment,” Am. J.
                                                                                     Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2002兲.
   Phys. 3 共31兲, 197–200 共1962兲.                                                  19
 6
   W. C. Marlow, The Physics of Pocket Billiards 共MAST, Palm Beach                   J. Hierrezuelo and C. Carnero, “Sliding and rolling: The physics of a
   Gardens, FL, 1994兲.                                                               rolling ball,” Phys. Educ. 30 共3兲, 177–182 共1995兲.
                                                                                  20
 7
   G. Pingali, A. Opalach, and Y. Jean, “Ball tracking and virtual replays for       A. Domenech, T. Domenech, and J. Cebrian, “Introduction to the study of
   innovative tennis broadcasts,” in Proceedings of the 15th International           rolling friction,” Am. J. Phys. 55 共3兲, 231–235 共1987兲.
                                                                                  21
   Conference on Pattern Recognition, Barcelona, Spain, 2000, Vol. 4, pp.            K. Williams, Know the Game: Snooker, 3rd ed. 共A&C Black, London,
   152–156.                                                                          2002兲.
                                                                                  22
 8
   K. Davis, “A watchful eye” 共www.matrox.com/imaging/news_events/                   J. Witters and D. Duymelinck, “Rolling and sliding resistive forces on
   feature/archives/2002/hawkeye.cfm兲.                                               balls moving on flat surface,” Am. J. Phys. 54 共1兲, 80–83 共1986兲.
                                                                                  23
 9
   D. G. Alciatore, The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards 共Sterling,      J. Walker, “The physics of the follow, the draw and the massé 共in billiards
   New York, 2004兲.                                                                  and pool兲,” Sci. Am. 249 共1兲, 124–129 共1983兲.
10                                                                                24
   D. G. Alciatore, “Pool and billiards physics principles by Coriolis and           A. Domenech and E. Casasus, “Frontal impact of rolling spheres,” Phys.
   others” 共http:billiards.colostate.edu/physics/Alciatore_AJP_MS22090_              Educ. 26 共3兲, 186–189 共1991兲.
                                                                                  25
   revised_pool_physics_article.pdf兲.                                                K. Voyenli and E. Eriksen, “On the motion of an ice hockey puck,” Am.
11
   R. Cross, “Cue and ball deflection 共or “squirt”兲 in billiards,” Am. J. Phys.      J. Phys. 53 共12兲, 1149–1153 共1985兲.

794         Am. J. Phys., Vol. 77, No. 9, September 2009                                                         Mathavan, Jackson, and Parkin              794
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/avoiding_scratches.html
title: Avoiding Scratches - November 2010
topics: collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
Avoiding Scratches - November 2010 - Tom Ross
Tom Ross > Avoiding Scratches - November 2010
Avoiding Scratches - November 2010
For me the best thing about pool
is the fact that the learning never ends. And after spending most of this past
spring and summer filming the Video
Encyclopedia of Pool Shots with Dr. Dave Alciatore, I learned a lot,
especially in light of all the years Ive played and taught pool. Our work
culminated in the most comprehensive collection of pool shots ever published,
spanning five DVDs of nothing but shots and explanations from the most basic
to the very advanced. Last month I presented a simple but powerful technique I
learned from Dr. Dave for
predicting the cue balls path for many shots and will continue now with more
examples of that techniques usefulness.
Earlier we learned that for cut
angles ranging from a quarter-ball hit to a three-quarter-ball hit, a naturally
rolling cue ball will deflect away from the path it takes to the object ball at
an average angle of 30 degrees. The overall range from minimum to maximum
deflection is narrow enough to use 30 degrees as a reliable indicator for the
cue balls path after its collision with the object ball. Then we learned to
apply Dr. Daves famous peace-sign technique to predict the cue balls path.
It turns out that, for most of us, a relaxed peace sign makes a 30-degree angle
and you can check yours with a drafting triangle. Or you can visit Dr. Daves
site where he has a template you can download and print for that purpose. You
can find the URL at the bottom of this page.
Last month we applied the
peace-sign method to a couple of shots in order to predict and execute accurate
position play. Now we can apply it in another way to determine shot selection.
In the diagram we see an 8-Ball situation with only two stripes remaining before
the 8 ball. Initially most players would lean toward shot A first, mainly
because its closer to the cue ball than shot B, something we learn to prefer
very early in our learning. And we would look at shooting that ball into pocket
X. But that looks a little dangerous. So we examine the outcome by placing the
peace sign as shown with the index finger on the line that the cue ball takes to
the object ball and the point where our fingers would meet over the spot where
the cue balls center will be at contact. Sure enough a quick peace-sign check
tells us that a rolling cue ball will scratch in pocket Y. So then we decide to
shoot the stripe into pocket Y, but that one looks a little scary too. Once
again the peace sign reveals that shot will lead to a scratch in pocket X with a
rolling cue ball. We can avoid both scratches with stun or draw but either one
of those choices will send the cue ball to the side rail and keep it at that
same end of the table, far from the next shot. The only way to get position for
the next ball from ball A is to shoot it into pocket X with draw and inside
english to move it three rails around the table for a shot on the next stripe.
Thats possible but quite difficult, in terms of both pocketing the ball and
controlling the cue ball.
After seeing no future in shot A
its time to turn our attention to shot B. Though its a little farther away
it turns out as the better shot to play first. To make sure that its okay, we
apply the peace-sign test and see that the middle finger points to the short
rail well away from the nearest pocket. Further we see that a rolling cue ball,
perhaps with a little right-hand english, moves easily and naturally into
position for ball A and an easy run out. So, even though its slightly more
difficult, we see that ball B is the better shot to play first.
Very often we find ourselves
looking at a shot and asking, Will I scratch? And on too many of those
occasions we shoot the shot only to catch ourselves grumbling soon afterwards,
Damn, I knew that was a scratch shot. It takes a lot of experience and
many thousands of shots before we can paint consistent mental pictures of the
cue balls path to predict position or scratches. With the peace-sign method
however, we have a simple yet reliable tool to make those predictions for a
rolling cue ball across a broad range of cut angles.
For
a 30-Degree Template:
http://billiards.colostate.edu/
Click on Instructor and Student Resources then scroll
down to Templates and Diagrams where you will find the 30-Degree Rule Angle
Template.
Need Help? 24 Hour Response M-F
Monthly Newsletter
Customer Service
Do you have questions about your
order, shipping status or returns or do you need information on
our products or about placing an order with us email us at sales@ozonebilliards.com
Sign Up for
our free monthly email newsletter which includes articles from Tom Ross, Certified Billiard Instructor
and other great information about new products and special offers.
Enter
Email Address
En Espanol
Si tiene preguntas en espanol
mande correo electronico a espanol@ozonebilliards.com
Home
| Info
| Shopping Cart
| Billiard Supply
| Shipping Info
| Privacy
Policy | Site Index
Check Out Some of Our Most Popular Items
Pool
Balls
| Pool Table Lights
| Cue Racks
| Pool Table
Felt | Pool Cue Cases
| Viking Cues
| | Lucasi
Cues
| McDermott Cues
| Cuetec Cues | Predator Cues
Copyright 2001-Present Ozone Billiards, Inc.
Tom Ross > Avoiding Scratches - November 2010
Avoiding Scratches - November 2010
Free articles, new product info & special offers
Customer Service
Shopping Cart
Clearance
Billiard Supplies
Pool Cues by Brand
Pool Cues by Price
Pool Cue Cases
Pool Balls
Pool Ball Racks
Cue Racks & Holders
Pool Cue Accessories
Pool Table Accessories
Pool Table Felt
Pool Table Lights
Billiards Books & DVDs
Clothing
Specialty Items
Billiard Posters & Signs
Bar Stools
Pub Tables
Dart Supplies
Table Tennis
Customer Feedback
Pool On TV
Tournament Calendar
Customer Service
My Account
Order Status
Wish List
Ozone Rewards
Billiard Supplies Pool Cues by BrandPool Cues by PricePool BallsPool Cue CasesDart SuppliesDart Boards
HomeFree CatalogNew ProductsBest SellersClearanceEngraving On Pool CuesTournament CalendarPool On TV
What Our Customers Say...
Read more...
Best Sellers
- Yahoo Store Design
Click To Bookmark This Page!
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/back_of_the_ball_aiming.pdf
title: Back Of The Ball Aiming
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Back-of-the-Ball Aiming”                                                   ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     If you ask enough “old timers” how they visualize where a rolling cue ball (CB) heads after hitting an
object ball (OB), eventually you will hear: “I just visualize the CB on the back of the OB … that’s the direction
the CB heads.” This is sometimes called “back-of-the-ball” aiming. Diagram 1 illustrates how it works. First
visualize where the CB will contact the OB. This is called the ghost-ball (GB) position. Then visualize the
mirror image of the GB on the other side of the OB (i.e., on the “back of the ball”). The final CB direction will
be parallel to a line through the OB and mirrored GB (i.e., in the direction the “back” ball). This “old timer”
trick works well for cuts close to a ½-ball hit where the back-of-the-ball aim points in the “natural angle”
direction. It also works for a full-ball hit, where a rolling CB heads straight forward. However, it does not work
well for cut shots too different from a ½-ball or full-ball hit. In the remainder of the article, I present two
alternative systems that work much better. For those interested in a careful and detailed comparison of these
and other systems, see TP B.13 which does all of the math and uses graphs to compare the approaches.

                                    Diagram 1 “Back-of-the-ball” aiming

    Diagram 2 illustrates a system that is more reliable over a wide range of shots. I call it the 30º rule
because, with a rolling CB, the CB deflects off the OB by close to 30º over a wide range of shots between a
¼-ball and ¾-ball hit. Many typical shots at a pool table fall within this range. Diagram 3 illustrates how the
Dr. Dave “peace sign” can be used to visualize the 30º natural-angle direction. For most people, a firm but
relaxed peace sign forms close to a 30º angle. If you point one finger in the direction the CB will head into the
OB, the other finger will point in the direction it will head after hitting the OB. Diagram 3 also shows how
faster speed affects the CB path. With more speed, the CB swings out more along the tangent line before
curving to the final 30º direction. For more information and demonstrations of how to apply this useful rule at
the table, see NV B.66 and the other online videos and past articles on the “30 degree rule” resource page in
the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   September, 2016
                   Diagram 2 30º rule

Billiards Digest                        September, 2016
                                Diagram 3 30º rule peace sign visualization

     Diagram 4 illustrates a system that works better for fuller hits (thicker than a ¾-ball hit), where the 30º
rule does not apply. The CB deflection angle for full hits is about three times the cut angle. You just need to
visualize the cut angle (“A”) of the shot and then visualize three times that angle (“3A”), which is the amount
the CB will deflect off the OB. FYI, there is also a useful system for predicting CB direction for thin hits (less
than ¼-ball hits). It isn’t as useful, but if you want to check it out, along with other CB control systems, see
the “where the CB goes for different types of shots” resource page in the “cue ball control” FAQ section at
billiards.colostate.edu.

                                       Diagram 4 3x rule for thick hits

Billiards Digest                                                                                   September, 2016
     I hope these systems help you better predict and control where “whitey” will head in key game situations
where you need to detect or avoid a scratch, break out a cluster, execute a carom shot, or just get through
traffic while playing position. I also hope that the next time “old timers” tell you to use the “back of the ball”
system, you can help them learn some new tricks.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV B.66 – 30º degree rule, from VEPS I
normal video

                    TP B.13 – Rolling cue ball deflection angle approximations
technical proof

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-
author of the Video Encyclopedias of “Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Pool Practice (VEPP),” and “Eight
Ball (VEEB),” and the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS)” and “Billiard University (BU)”
instructional DVD series, all available at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   September, 2016
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/ball_colors_and_numbers.pdf
title: Ball Colors And Numbers
topics: technical_proofs, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Ball Colors and Numbers”                                                  ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu.
The reference numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     Did you ever wonder why pool balls are colored the way they are, or why some manufacturers have
attempted to change the color scheme? It turns out that there are logical explanations and clear reasons for
the color choices. The standard pool ball color and number scheme is shown in Diagram 1 (courtesy of
Patrick Johnson). Every "solid" (balls 1-7) has a different color, and every "stripe" (balls 9-15) uses the same
color as the corresponding "solid" (e.g., the 1-ball and 9-ball are both yellow). If you add 8 to any solid
number, you get the corresponding stripe number of the same color. For example the yellow 9 is 8 more than
the yellow 1 (9 = 1 + 8), the blue 10 is 8 more than the blue 2 (10 = 2 + 8), etc. An interesting mathematical
fact about the balls of the same color is that if you add the numbers, the sums are increasing even numbers:
1+9=10, 2+10=12, 3+11=14, 4+12=16, 5+13=18, 6+14=20, 7+15=22.

                     Diagram 1 Pool ball color pattern (courtesy of Patrick Johnson)

    The choices for the ball colors were not just random. Yellow (1 and 9), blue (2 and 10) and red (3 and 11)
are primary colors, indicated by the large-size circles in the diagram. These colors are as far apart as
possible on the color “wheel,” providing good contrast. Purple (4 and 12), orange (5 and 13) and green (6
and 14) are secondary colors, as indicated by the medium-size circles in the diagram. They are called
secondary colors since they are combinations of the primary colors: purple = red + blue, orange = red +

Billiards Digest                                                                                       May, 2017
yellow, and green = yellow + blue. They are also as far apart as possible on the color wheel. Maroon (7 and
15) is the only ball color that is not primary or secondary, hence the smaller circle size in the diagram. It is
called a tertiary color since it is a combination of primary and secondary colors (red + purple). If there were
only 6 different ball colors, they could all be equally separated on the color wheel for the best contrast.
                                                    th
Unfortunately, pool balls need 7 colors, so the 7 was placed between two of the others, again for the best
contrast. Finally, the CB and 8 ball are white (a combination of all colors) and black (no color).

     In theory, the chosen ball colors provide the best contrast possible, making them easy to distinguish.
Unfortunately, in the reality of TV and video pool, the contrast isn’t always adequate, especially under poor
lighting conditions and on a green cloth, which can be a little dark. It can help to use a brighter cloth color (for
example, Simonis “Tournament Blue”) and better lighting. But even then, the dark blue (2 and 10) and purple
(4 and 12) can be difficult to distinguish on video. To attempt to improve this, Aramith created a “TV ball”
color scheme, where purple was replaced by pink. This certainly helps some; but unfortunately, the pink
doesn’t have great contrast with red (3 and 11) and orange (5 and 13). The green (6 and 14) and maroon (7
and 15) are also a bit dark and can be difficult to distinguish among the blue, purple, green and black,
especially on low-quality video. In an attempt to deal with this, Cyclop introduced the “skittle” colors, where
light green and cyan are used for the 6/14 and 7/15. This seems to help some, but this color choice seems to
create more confusion than clarity. Honestly, I am not a fan of the alternative color schemes. I like the logic
and rationale of the traditional colors. And with a bright cloth color and adequate lighting (and with the
numbers on the balls), the balls are fairly easy to distinguish, especially with now-common HD video.

     If you arrange the balls in a full 15-ball rack in a methodical way, as shown in Diagram 2, all sorts of
interesting numerical consistencies and patterns arise. I first learned about these patterns from the YouTube
video: https://youtu.be/uQBeWCFsvtg. First of all, all ball-color pairs are adjacent (yellow 1 and 9, blue 2
and 10, red 3 and 11, etc.). The solids and stripes are symmetrical (solid 2 vs. stripe 9, solid 3 vs. stripe 10,
solid 4 vs. stripe 11, etc.). Solid and stripe pairs are also symmetrical (3-7 solids vs. 10-14 stripes, and 4-6
solids vs. 11-13 stripes). As shown by the added numbers in the diagram, the sum of adjacent ball numbers
are symmetrical (2+10 = 9+3 = 12, 10+4 = 3+11 = 14, 4+12 = 11+5 = 16, 12+6 = 5+13 = 18, and 14+6 = 7+13
= 20), and the sums are even numbers that increase as you work down the rack (12, 14, 16, 18, 20). The
sum of side balls is also symmetric (1+2+10+4+12 = 1+9+3+11+5 = 29).

                                    Diagram 2 Mathematical rack patterns

    Diagram 3 shows some more numerical patterns in the math-magical rack. The sum of symmetrical ball
pairs are odd numbers (2+9=11, 10+3=13, 4+11=15, 12+5=17, 6+13=19, 14+7=21, 8+15=23), and the sums
increase as you work through the rack. Also, the clusters of 6 balls on each side of the rack add to the same
number (2+10+4+14+12+6 = 9+3+7+11+13+5 = 48). Pretty interesting stuff, isn’t it … almost scary.

Billiards Digest                                                                                           May, 2017
                                Diagram 3 More mathematical rack patterns

    I bet you didn’t realize how logical and mathematical pool ball colors and rack numbering can be.
Wouldn’t it be nice if playing pool could also be this algorithmic and simple … like color-by-number painting?
Well, it isn’t. If it were, pool would not be the fun and challenging game that it is. I know most pool players
could probably care less about pool ball colors and number patterns, but I hope at least a few readers out
there found the info a little interesting … even if it has nothing to do with actually playing pool.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor and author of The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards
book and DVD, the Video Encyclopedias of Pool Shots (VEPS), Pool Practice (VEPP) and Eight
Ball (VEEB), and the How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS) and Billiard University (BU) instructional DVD
series, all available at: DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      May, 2017
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/ball_weight_and_size_difference_effects_part_i.pdf
title: Ball Weight And Size Difference Effects Part I
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Ball Weight and Size Difference Effects – Part I”                          ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

    When playing on some coin-operated bar tables (AKA “bar boxes”), have you ever noticed that
sometimes it’s difficult to draw the ball, or sometimes the CB rolls forward more than you think it should. Well
the reason could be differences in ball weights. The answer could also be that you are looking for excuses for
why you missed a shot or position, but let’s assume for now that the balls are in fact reacting abnormally.
Recently, fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett and I filmed a video showing all of the effects caused by cue ball
(CB) and object ball (OB) weight differences. In this article, I’ll summarize the effects on square-hit shots, and
next month I’ll focus on cut shots.

     First of all, why would the CB and OB weights be different? In older bar boxes, the CB was made larger
and/or heavier to enable the ball-return mechanism to separate the CB from the OBs. Weight differences can
also occur with old and worn balls. Generally, with an originally equal-weight set, the CB will tend to be
slightly smaller and lighter because it takes more abuse from the cue tip, other balls, and cloth, and it wears
faster as a result. The 1-ball can also be smaller and lighter than the other OBs because it takes the full force
of the break at the front of the rack. Also, if a new CB is used with an older OB set (e.g., when a CB is
replaced due to damage, which seems to occur more and more with phenolic-tip break and jump cues), the
CB will generally be slightly larger and heavier than the worn OBs not replaced. The size and weight
differences are usually very small, but the effects can sometimes be noticeable, especially on those older bar
boxes.

     The video Bob and I filmed together can be found in HSV B.49. To exaggerate the weight-difference
effects, we used different combinations of pool balls and carom balls. Carom balls are noticeably larger and
heavier than pool balls. (Pool balls are 2 1/4” in diameter and weight about 6 ounces, and carom balls are
about 2 7/16” in diameter and weigh about 7.5 ounces.) As illustrated in Diagram 1, with equal-weight balls,
a square-hit stun shot, with no top of bottom spin, results in a stop shot, where the CB ideally stops dead in
place and delivers all of its speed to the OB. As demonstrated in the video, a stop shot with a heavier CB
requires a slight amount of bottom spin. However, “stop shot” is a bit of a misnomer in this case because the
CB still drives forward slightly before the drag action of the bottom spin stops the ball. So, strictly speaking,
this is not a “stop shot”; although, it is as close to a “stop shot” as you can get with unequal-weight balls. A
lighter CB with stun bounces back from the OB, giving the appearance of slight draw (see Diagram 1c). To hit
a “stop shot” with a lighter CB, you actually need a slight amount of topspin, which slows the natural backward
motion to a stop. With many of the shots in the video, you will notice that the balls bounce some after contact.
This is due to the size difference between the balls. Anytime balls hit off of their horizontal equators, they
naturally bounce because the impact force between the balls isn’t perfectly horizontal.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     February, 2012
                           stun shots

                                          a.) equal weight (stop shot)
                                                       1

                                                 b.) heavy CB
                                                       2

                                                  c.) light CB
                                                       3

                                 Diagram 1 Stun shot ball weight effects

     As illustrated in Diagram 2, a heavier CB with topspin follows the OB even more than normal. As
demonstrated in HSV B.49, the extra weight pushes the CB forward naturally, and the topspin accelerates the
ball even more. With a lighter CB, it is more difficult to create follow. As demonstrated in the video, some of
the topspin is lost as the natural backward motion is slowed. This leaves less spin to generate forward speed
and follow.

                          follow shots

                                               a.) equal weight
                                                       1

                                                 b.) heavy CB
                                                       2

                                                  c.) light CB
                                                       3

                                Diagram 2 Follow shot ball weight effects

     Diagram 3 illustrates the effects of ball weight on square-hit draw shots. As demonstrated in HSV B.49,
it takes more effort to draw a heavier CB. Some of the backspin is lost to slow the natural forward motion of
the CB after the hit, which leaves less spin to accelerate the CB backwards. A draw shot is very easy with a
light CB. The CB bounces back from the OB naturally, and any backspin adds to the draw speed.

Billiards Digest                                                                                  February, 2012
                            draw shots

                                                 a.) equal weight
                                                             1

                                                   b.) heavy CB
                                                            2

                                                    c.) light CB
                                                             3

                                  Diagram 3 Draw shot ball weight effects

     Diagram 4 shows a game example where a heavier CB can be used to your advantage, in this case to
pocket the 8-ball in the side pocket. With a square-hit frozen combination, the 1st ball (the 8) will naturally
follow the 2nd ball some naturally (due to interesting physics that occurs with simultaneous collisions of
multiple balls), and it will do so more at faster speed. Bottom spin on the CB can be used to assist this action
by transferring some topspin to the 1st ball, but this is not required to move the 1st ball forward. With equal-
weight balls, there is a practical limit to how far you can send the 1st ball forward with a reasonable-speed
shot. However, with a heavier CB, the distance you can send the 1st ball is much greater, making the shot
much easier, especially with the OBs are farther from the pocket. Sometimes “inconveniences” like balls of
different weights can be quite helpful.

                                                            15    larger
                                                             8   distance
                                                                 possible
                                                                    with
                                                                  heavy
                                                 pocket             CB
                                               the 8 ball

                              Diagram 4 Moving the 1st ball in a frozen combo

      CB size differences, irrespective of the weight differences, also create interesting effects. For example, if
you aim normally, as you do with a standard size ball, a larger ball will hit the OB a little thicker than you
expect. Conversely, if the CB is smaller than the OB, it will slightly overcut the ball with your normal aim.
Also, rail cut shots can be an extra challenge with an over-sized CB. With the CB and OB frozen to the
cushion, the line of action of the shot will be slightly into the rail. You can compensate for this by aiming a
little up rail with more speed, creating more CB compression into the cushion. You can also aim for
simultaneous OB-cushion contact and use outside English to throw the OB back along the cushion. In pool,
size (and weight) does matter. Fortunately, over-sized CBs are not as commonplace as they used to be in
bar boxes.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      February, 2012
    Another effect related to weight differences is changes in squirt (AKA CB deflection). A heavier CB will
squirt slightly less than normal, and a lighter CB will squirt slightly more. This could require additional aim
compensation when using English. Another size effect is racking efficiency. Old and worn OBs will not rack
as well as new high-quality balls. Slight mismatches in size and non-spherical shape (due to non-uniform
wear) will result in less-tight racks and poor break action (bad spread, more clusters, fewer balls made). Are
you convinced yet that it is better to play with balls of equal and standard weights and sizes?

     To see how much ball weight can vary in typical conditions, I took an accurate digital scale to my local
pool hall (“Match Ups” in Fort Collins, Colorado). I weighed the CB and randomly selected OBs (and the 1-
ball specifically) in each of eight Valley bar boxes with the assistance and permission of the owners. (Thanks
Mike and Nicole!) The CB weights were fairly consistent with an average of 5.89 oz (167 g), a minimum of
5.78 oz (164 g), and a maximum of 5.93 oz (168 g). The OB weights were lighter (2-3 percent on average)
and less consistent with an average of 5.75 oz (163 g), a minimum of 5.47 oz (155 g) and a maximum of 5.89
oz (167 g). The lightest OB was a 1-ball, which makes sense based on the extra abuse it takes (but this
could also just be coincidence). If the heaviest CB were paired up with the lightest OB, the percentage
difference would be about 8%. Luckily, this is still much less than the 25% difference demonstrated with the
pool and carom balls in HSV B.49. However, the weight-difference effects in this article would definitely be
noticeable with this particular CB-OB combination, especially to a good and observant player.

    The next time you play on a bar box with a heavy CB, see if you can notice some of the effects described
and illustrated. Next month, we’ll look at the effects of ball weight differences on cut shots, and specifically
look at the impact on the 90˚ and 30˚ rules. If you don’t know the answers yet, think about it based on the info
presented this month. There will be a quiz next month (… just kidding).

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   HSV B.49 - Cue ball and object ball weight/size difference effects
high-speed video

PS:
      •     I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
            familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
            please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” and co-author of the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS)” and
“The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).”

Billiards Digest                                                                                   February, 2012
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/ball_weight_and_size_difference_effects_part_ii.pdf
title: Ball Weight And Size Difference Effects Part Ii
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Ball Weight and Size Difference Effects – Part II”                             ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

     Last month, we looked at ball and weight difference effects. The focus was on square-hit stun, follow,
and draw shots. This month, we’ll look at how weight differences affect cut shots and the 90˚ and 30˚ rules.
All of the effects are described and demonstrated in online video HSV B.49, which I recently filmed with fellow
columnist Bob Jewett.

     Remember, the CB is sometimes heavier on some older coin-operated “bar boxes.” Also, even with an
originally equal-weight set, the cue ball (CB) will sometimes be lighter because it takes more abuse from the
cue tip, other balls, and cloth, and wears faster as a result. And if a new CB is used with an older object ball
(OB) set, the CB will generally be slightly larger and heavier than the worn OBs not replaced.

     Diagram 1 illustrates the effects of ball weight differences on a stun shot, where the CB has no top of
bottom spin at impact with the OB. With a cut angle, a stun shot sends the CB straight down the tangent line,
which is perpendicular to the line of travel of the OB. This is the famous the 90˚ rule, which applies only for
balls of equal weight. As shown in HSV B.49, the CB heads straight down the tangent line regardless of stun
shot speed. As shown in the diagram, a heavy CB with stun goes forward of the tangent line, but still heads
in a straight line. A light CB with stun deflects back from the tangent line.

                                                               90º    heavy         equal
                                  stun                                 CB           weight

                                                                                      tangent
                                                                        light           line
                                                                         CB

                                  Diagram 1 Stun shot ball weight effects

     Diagram 2 illustrates the effects of ball weight differences on a follow shot, where the CB rolls into the OB
with topspin. Follow shots curve forward of the tangent line, which happens almost immediately with a slow-
roll shot. Over a wide range of cut angles, the angle the CB deflects off the OB is about 30˚, sometimes
called the “natural angle.” This is the famous 30˚ rule (see the 30˚ rule resource page in the FAQ section of
my website for more info and demonstrations). As shown in HSV B.49, with faster speed the CB persists
along the tangent line longer before curving forward. The 30-degree rule applies for any balls (pool, carom, or

Billiards Digest                                                                                       March, 2012
snooker) as long as the CB is the same weight as the OB. As shown in the diagram, a heavy CB follows
sooner and more than normal. A lighter CB actually deflects back from the tangent line slightly before going
forward and doesn’t follow forward as much as normal.

                                                           aiming
                                                             line      heavy
                                                                        CB
                                                                                 equal
                                                                                 weight
                                                                30º
                                 follow                                         light
                                                                                 CB
                                                                                        tangent
                                                                                          line

                                 Diagram 2 Follow shot ball weight effects

    Diagram 3 illustrates the effects of ball weight differences on a draw shot, where the CB slides into the
OB with backspin. With a draw shot, the CB curves back from the tangent line. To predict the amount of
draw, you can use the trisect system, which is illustrated in the diagram. For cut angles less than about 40˚, a
good-action draw shot results in a final CB angle that is 3-times the cut angle from the original direction (see
A and 3A in the diagram). For more information and demonstrations, see the trisect system resource page in
the draw FAQ section of my website. As with follow shots, with more speed, the CB persists along the
tangent line longer before curving to the final direction (for more info and demonstrations, see the speed
effects resource page in the FAQ section of my website). As shown in the diagram, a heavy CB with
backspin goes forward of the tangent line before drawing back, and doesn’t draw back as much. It is much
easier to draw a lighter CB. The lighter CB bounces back some naturally and the bottom spin makes the CB
draw back even more.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     March, 2012
                                    draw                                       heavy     tangent
                                                                                CB         line

                                                                                        equal
                                                        A
                                                                                        weight

                                                             3A            light          trisect
                                                                            CB              line

                                    Diagram 3 Draw shot ball weight effects

   The next time you play on a bar box with a heavy CB, or if you’re playing with a set of old OBs and a new
CB, see if you can notice some of the effects described and illustrated in this article and last month.
Obviously, to play accurate position, avoid scratches, and aim carom and break-out shots, it is important to
have a feel for these effects if you happen to play on equipment with ball weight differences.

   If you still haven’t checked out the online video yet, visit my website and navigate to HSV B.49. It’s much
more fun seeing the effects rather than just reading about them. Better yet, find a heavy CB (or a carom ball)
and try all of the shots yourself.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   HSV B.49 - Cue ball and object ball weight/size difference effects
high-speed video

PS:
      •     I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
            familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
            please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” and co-author of the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS)” and
“The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).”

Billiards Digest                                                                                    March, 2012
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/bank_shot_reference_tracks.pdf
title: Bank Shot Reference Tracks
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
“Bank Shot Reference Tracks”                                                  ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Recently, Bob Jewett and I created the Video Encyclopedia of One Pocket (VEOP), a 5-volume full-
length instructional video series that covers all the skills, knowledge, strategy, and moves you need to master
this great game.        Complete information, including free online video excerpts, can be found at
DrDaveBilliards.com/VEOP. The series is about one pocket (1P), but many of the shots, techniques, and
principles also apply to other pool games. In this article, I look at useful bank-shot reference tracks presented
in Volume IV of VEOP and in online video NV K.3.

     Whether you like or use systems or not, it is helpful to learn common bank tracks or reference lines useful
in 1P. A good place to start is with 1-rail banks from up-table as shown in Image 1. To practice these, set up
a row of balls a diamond off the side rail as shown. Then, with cue ball (CB) in hand, hit a pocket-speed stop
shot for each ball position to pocket each ball in the bottom-right corner. At pocket speed, the object ball (OB)
will be rolling into the cushion, which makes the results consistent. The purpose for drills like this is not just to
get practice. They also help you build a memory of reference tracks and lines that will help you aim similar
shots in game situations. These 1-rail track lines are easy to remember. As shown in the top-left of Image 1,
on my table (which is typical), the tracks are a little steeper than 45° close to the side pocket, close to 45° close
to a diamond above the side, and a little shallower than 45° above that. As shown in the bottom-right of Image
1, 45° is easy to visualize in any corner of a pool table using lines through corresponding diamonds.

                                              Image 1 1-Rail banks

    Now let’s look at 2-rail banks off the head cushion as shown in Image 2, again banking to the bottom-right
corner. The balls close to the head rail won’t have full roll, so shot speed is critical. With slightly slower speed,
the OB will develop more roll into the first cushion, causing it to go long off the first cushion, sending the OB
short of (above, on the side-rail side of) the bottom-right corner pocket (see Image 3). And with slightly faster

Billiards Digest                                                                                            May, 2023
speed, the OB will slide more into the first cushion, causing it to go short off the first cushion, sending it long
(on the end-rail side) of the bottom-right corner target (see Image 3). With the OBs farther from the rail, the
speed isn’t as critical since the ball will have full roll over a range of speeds. The 6-ball is on the head spot,
which is usually close to the limit of what is possible on most tables if you barely miss both to-left corner pocket
points. On many tables, this shot will go long, but it goes go on the table in the video. I was even able to get it
to go a tad short, which is unusual. You always need to test out a table under a given set of conditions to know
what is possible. As shown in Image 2, all these 2-rail tracks are very close to 45° into the head rail, which is
good to know as a reference for aiming any 2-rail banks from up table.

                                              Image 2 2-Rail banks

     It is helpful to practice the effects of OB distance to the rail. As shown in Image 3, the middle track at the
4th ball position is a good one to work on. The ideal track line to pocket the ball is 45° into rail; but as shown in
the video, we recommend setting up the CB for an angle slightly less steep into the head rail to better explore
distance and speed effects. At this angle, the bank comes up short of the pocket (see Image 2). Shooting
along that same line with the OB frozen to the cushion instead, the bank goes long. Distance to the rail, and
therefore the amount of topspin the OB has when it hits the cushion, is critically important. At a certain “Goldie
Locks” distance away from the head rail, the pocket-speed bank goes along this line. You should practice this
for several of the OB positions, and at different distances from the rail to get a feel for how to adjust your aim
relative to the 45° reference, depending on how close the OB is to the rail.

Billiards Digest                                                                                            May, 2023
                                       Image 3 Distance and speed effects

     Check out online video NV K.3 to see demonstrations of all the banks illustrated and discussed in this
article. Better yet, try out the banks on your table to find and practice the references tracks. That way, the next
time you need to bank to your pocket from up-table, you won’t need to count diamonds, do calculations, or try
to visualize or “feel” the correct angle of the shot. You just need to remember the practiced reference track
angles. If you want to learn more about the great game of one-pocket, check out the Video Encyclopedia of
One Pocket (VEOP) in online video NV K.1 and at DrDaveBilliards.com.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV K.1 – Video Encyclopedia of One Pocket (VEOP) Trailer
   normal video
                   NV K.3 – Bank Shot Reference Tracks You Need to Know, from VEOP-IV

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                             May, 2023
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/bar_rules_and_dirty_pool.pdf
title: Bar Rules And Dirty Pool
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Bar Rules and Dirty Pool”                                                      ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at drdavepoolinfo.com. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    In online video (NV L.46), I discuss and demonstrate the commonly accepted "bar rules" used in casual,
non-league, non-tournament 8-ball play. The differences from the WPA "official rules of pool" are pointed out,
examples of common bar rule variations are covered, and many types of shots that are considered “dirty pool”
in bar play are demonstrated. I’ll summarize the important points and some interesting examples from the video
below.

    There is no official rule set for 8-ball “bar rules,” but here are the generally-accepted main differences
from the “official rules” of pool:

          1. If you pocket one or more balls on the break, the group with the largest number of balls down
             becomes your group. In other words, it is “Take What You Make.” If an equal number of group
             balls is pocketed, the table remains open.

          2. If the 8-ball is pocketed on the break, you win; unless you also scratch or jump the cue ball (CB)
             off the table, in which case you lose.

          3. Every detail must be called on every non-straight-in shot. That applies to combos, kisses,
             caroms, rail-first hits, kicks, and banks. If you don’t call the details of a shot, you lose your turn and
             the CB remains where it is.

          4. If you scratch or if the CB leaves the table on any shot (including the break), the opponent gets ball
             in hand in the “kitchen” behind the head string. And the CB must be shot out of the kitchen
             before contacting a ball or cushion. If the only object ball (OB) is in the kitchen, you need to kick
             at it. As shown in Image 1, you can also use a massé shot, assuming the CB first leaves the
             “kitchen” before hitting a cushion or ball, in this case hitting the bottom cushion outside the kitchen
             before rebound back to pocket the 1. See the video for a demonstration of the shot.

                                    Image 1 Massé shot out of the “kitchen”

          5. If you don’t hit one of your balls first, you lose your turn and the opponent shoots from where the
             CB lies.

          6. Others fouls under “official rules” are not called or penalized. They include not driving a ball to a
             cushion after ball contact, a double hit, a push shot, a scoop jump, and an intentional miscue.

Billiards Digest                                         1                                                   June 2025
          7. The 8-ball cannot be used in a combination or with a kiss shot. For example, in Image 2 shooting
             stripes, you are not allowed to hit the 11 into the 8 to pocket the 13.

                          Image 2 The 8 cannot be used with a combo or kiss shot

          8. When shooting the 8, a scratch results in loss of game, regardless of whether you pocket the
             8 or not. The same applies to jumping the CB off the table.

          9. Defensive play safeties are considered “dirty pool.” They should not be played unless they are
             the result of an honest effort to pocket a ball or breakout something when no shot is available. For
             example, in Image 3, I am making an “honest effort” to pocket the 9 in the left side pocket with a
             combo two-rail bank, so the two-way “safety” is okay.

                                  Image 3 “Dirty” two-way disguised safety

Billiards Digest                                      2                                                 June 2025
The complete list of “bar rule” differences (and more detail) can be found on the bar rules resource page at
drdavepoolinfo.com.

    One problem with “bar rules” is there are what seems to be endless variations in the rules depending on
where you play and who you play; and sometimes the rules change even during a game, usually to the benefit
of your unscrupulous opponent. Below are some common “bar rules” variations. In some bars:

          1. No jump or massé shots are allowed since they can damage the cloth if not executed with proper
             technique and equipment.

          2. The table is open after the break, regardless of what is pocketed or not.

          3. Scoop jump shots are allowed.

          4. The balls are racked with the outside balls alternating, possibly resulting in balls from one group
             (solids or stripes) on all 3 corners, creating a big advantage to pocket one or more balls of that
             group.

          5. “In the kitchen” means the front of the CB must be behind the head string, in which case the
             entire CB must pass the head string before contacting a ball or cushion.

          6. The 8-ball can be used in a combination or kiss shot.

          7. Opponent balls cannot be used in a combo or kiss shot.

          8. Fouls are called, resulting in loss of turn. They include double hits, pushes, and scoops.

          9. Safety play is not considered “dirty pool.”

          10. Incidental cushion contact on the way to the pocket needs to be called. And sometimes this
              applies even with a kick shot or a hit on a pocket hanger.

          11. Pocketed balls spot when you scratch, unless playing on a coin-operated “bar box.”

Again, bar rules can vary a lot depending on who you talk to. Ask a general rule, always ask first (ideally, before
playing) to find out what is allowed or what isn’t. Better yet, try to convince people to instead play under the
“official rules of pool” so there is no question about what is allowed, and since the official rules are well
documented and clear and do not penalize smart play.

    Under typical “bar rules” there is the potential to play shots that are considered “dirty pool.” Even though
these shots are not officially illegal under “bar rules,” they should be avoided to reduce the chances for
arguments and potential bodily harm. Below are some examples that are demonstrated in the video. It is dirty
pool to:

          1. Dink the CB with no attempt to pocket a ball, leaving your opponent tough.

          2. Purposely miss an easy shot to get a break-out and leave your opponent bad. Image 4 shows
             an example where I can purposely miss the straight 11 in the bottom-left corner to be able to break
             out the 9-13 cluster and leave my opponent bad with no look at the difficult 8 up table. You can try
             to “sell” the miss, but a knowledgeable opponent might be wise to this.

Billiards Digest                                      3                                                   June 2025
                                           Image 4 “Dirty” breakout shot

          3. Scratch on purpose to achieve some desirable outcome. For example, in Image 5, I can call the
             9 in the bottom-right corner but hit it into 11 on purpose to break out the 11-13 cluster while
             purposely scratching in the bottom-left corner. This would force my opponent to shoot from the
             kitchen at the difficult 1. Although, if you can “sell” this “missed shot” to your opponent, he might
             not feel slighted, needing to kick at his only ball. Although, as I demonstrate in the video, my
             “opponent” (me wearing another hat) can totally miss the 1 during an attempted kick and leave me
             tough on the remaining stripes. Maybe my “opponent” is smarter at “bar rules” than I think!

                                        Image 5 “Dirty” purposeful scratch

          4. Hit an opponent ball first to cause trouble. The video demonstrates an example where my
             “opponent” shows his smarts by pocketing my only remaining ball to leave me with only a bank on
             the 8. I reply with another “dirty pool shot”, calling the bank, but hitting it too easy “by mistake,”

Billiards Digest                                       4                                                  June 2025
                   attempting to hide the CB behind the 8. Unfortunately, I left my opponent a look at his last ball. If
                   you are going to play dirty pool, you should at least be effective. Although, with lots of dirty play
                   like this, somebody is likely to get a thumb broke or a punch in the face.

           5. Play an intentional foul like a scoop jump, an intentional miscue herd shot, an intentional double-
              hit “follow shot,” a push shot, or an intentional hit on the last opponent ball. Good game-situation
              examples of all of these are demonstrated in the video.

           6. Obviously send the lone 8 to a bad spot without making an honest attempt to pocket the ball.

           7. Move a problem ball with your hand or the cue during a shot. The video shows an example of
              using this ploy to break out a nearby cluster “by accident.”

           8. Intentionally hit an OB with the cue tip to pocket an impossible shot. I show an example in the
              video where I exaggerate a follow through on a shot to pocket a called ball that is impossible to
              make with a legal shot. Fortunately for my opponent, I also pocketed the 8 by accident to lose the
              game. I deserve that for trying to play dirty pool. Sometimes the Pool Gods are watching and
              penalize dirty play.

Again, if you don’t want to get a thumb broke, it is probably best not to attempt these types of shots under “bar
rules,” unless you are playing somebody who tries them on you first. Then, go for it … unless the other guy is
bigger, stronger, and meaner.

    I hope you enjoyed my overview of “bar rules” and “dirty pool” shots. Be sure to check out online video NV
L.46 so you can see game-situation examples of everything. And if you want more information, check out the
rules resource page at drdavepoolinfo.com, where I document and demonstrate the WPA “official rules of
pool,” list all league rule differences, and summarize “bar rules” in much more detail.

Stay clean, and good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                     NV L.46 – BAR RULES and DIRTY POOL – Why Official Rules are Important
   normal video

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at DrDavePoolInfo.com.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                            5                                                  June 2025
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/beer_goggle_effects.pdf
title: Beer-goggle Effects
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Beer-goggle Effects”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. See the website for details.

     After writing so many serious articles on pool physics recently, I decided to take a break and
write something less serious, and maybe even a little silly. This month’s topic deals with the
effects of alcohol on one’s actual and perceived levels of play. I have not done extensive
research on this topic, but I do have a fair amount of anecdotal experience from my college and
graduate school days of playing pool and drinking beer with friends at bars and pool halls.
People sometimes complain to me that I use too many charts and graphs in my articles (e.g.,
squirt vs. speed, throw vs. cut angle, etc.). Hopefully, the graph in this article is one most people
will understand and relate to, either from direct experience or observing others with alcohol on
their breath in bars and pool halls. When you’re an engineer like me, even silly articles like this
need graphs to help visualize the effects. Maybe this article can help some of the graph-fearing
readers out there better understand future pool-physics graphs I might present.

     Diagram 1 shows the effects of alcohol on both one’s actual level of play and one’s
perceived level of play. Also shown is the “beer goggle” curve that illustrates the level of desire
for unattractive members of the opposite sex. The horizontal scale on the graph represents the
number of beers consumed. If you prefer wine, mixed drinks, or hard liquor instead, the scale will
be more compressed (i.e., the effects happen faster). Curve “A” (the red curve) shows how level
of play might actually vary for a typical good player who is not new to drinking. The level of play
is fairly good to begin with. As the person drinks 2-3 beers, he or she might actually start playing
a little better because the beers might help relax the person (alcohol is a depressant after all),
resulting in less tension and a smoother, more accurate stroke. However, as the number of beers
is increased, the actual level of play decreases significantly as the level of intoxication increases.
Obviously, the shape of this curve and how fast and far it drops will vary from one person to the
next. Some people also might not benefit at all from the relaxing affects of the alcohol. Curve “B”
(the green curve) shows one such example. This player is not very good to begin with ... his or
her sober level of play is just “medium.” Alcohol only makes things worse ... the level of play
decreases even with the first beer, getting worse with subsequent beers.
                  high                                   C: perceived
                                                        (glass-half-full)

                                                                                                    level of desire for unattractive
                                                                                                     members of the opposite sex
                                 A: actual
                         (good drinker and player)
level of play

                                                                                E: "beer goggles"
                                               B: actual
                medium                 (poor drinker and player)

                                      D: perceived
                                   (glass-half-empty)

                  low

                                  2            4               6            8          10
                                                     number of beers
                                           Diagram 1 Effects of alcohol

     Now, actual level of play can be very different from a person’s perceived level of play,
especially when alcohol is involved. Inebriation can make some people delusional and affect
their judgment. Curves “C” (blue) and “D” (magenta) show examples of two such people. The
curve “C” person is delusional even before the first beer ... his or her perceived level of play is
actually higher than his or her actual level of play. This only gets worse with more alcohol ... up
to a point (about 6 beers). I call the curve “C” person a “glass-half-full” player, because he or she
has an optimistic view of their level of play. As the drop in the curve shows, even an optimistic
person with false confidence will eventually realize when their level of play has degraded to a
really low level. I call the curve “D” person a “glass-half-empty” player because he or she doesn’t
perceive a high level of play to begin with, and the perception goes up only as the level of play
goes up (as with curve “A”). Alcohol doesn’t seem to have much effect on the pessimistic curve
“D” player’s perception of their actual play (i.e., the curve is fairly horizontal).

    Curve “E” (orange) shows an entirely different effect called the “beer goggle effect.” I’m sure
many people have either direct experience with, or have observed, this effect in action. When
you drink too much, your judgment is not as good concerning what you think is attractive or not.
With intoxication, and as the night grows later, your level of desire for less-than-attractive
members of the opposite sex (or same sex, depending on your orientation) will generally
increase. Most people also become less inhibited with alcohol, so they are more likely to “seek”
partners, sometimes with uncharacteristic bravado. This might be analogous to a drunken
player’s go-for-it attitude and belief that he or she can sink any shot on the table. Before anybody
accuses me of being sexists, I want to be clear that these effects apply equally well to both
genders. Women can get the same false perceptions and “beer goggles” just like men do.

     When I wrote “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” several years ago, I actually
wanted to include this article’s topic and graph in the book, but several people advised me it was
too silly. I’m glad the BD managing editor (Mason King) allowed me the freedom to express my
silly side in print. What recently made me think about writing this article was a country music
radio station. I was on a long drive with friends out in the middle of nowhere, with only one radio
station available ... and it was as country as country gets. Country isn’t my favorite music genre,
but we very much enjoyed some of the creative, down-to-earth lyrics. The song that inspired me
to write this article was about a cowboy named Billy who drinks too much on weekends at a
country bar. Here’s the inspirational lyric that I don’t think I’ll forget for as long as I live:

             “He can’t see ugly through bloodshot eyes. Billy’s got his beer goggles on.”

To get the full effect of this line (from Neal McCoy’s “Billy’s Got His Beer Goggles On”), you need
to hear the slide-guitar twang in the background. Read it (or try to sing it) again with a country-
style tune in your head.

    I hope people like Billy will appreciate this article and think about the graph the next time they
drink too much when playing pool or looking for a potential “companion.”

   Well, I hope you didn’t think my article was too silly. If so, don’t despair ... I return to my
normal “shtick” next month.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/bending_twisting_and_stiffening_kicks_and_banks.pdf
title: Bending Twisting And Stiffening Kicks And Banks
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Bending, Twisting, and Stiffening Kicks and Banks”                         ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Do you know how to bend kicks? And do you know how to twist and stiffen or shorten banks? And do
you think it is possible to bend a bank short? This article will explore these techniques and questions. To
begin, you might want to view online videos NV H.2 and NV H.3. They demonstrate and discuss all of the
terminology, shots, and questions in this article.

     Diagram 1 illustrates an 8-ball situation where we are shooting solids and need to kick at the 8-ball
hanger. The 11 and 13 block the straight shot, and there are no reasonable shots at a jump, masse, or
multiple-rail kick. Also, as shown by the black cue ball (CB) path, a slow-rolling one-rail kick is blocked by the
12. In situations like this, it is necessary to change the CB’s rebound angle and path with speed and/or spin.
As shown by the red path, one option is to simply use more speed to delay the curve forward to pocket the
ball. Another option, as shown by the blue path, is to use bottom spin to shorten the angle and curve the
rebound path. A final option, for example if additional obstacle balls blocked the other paths, is to add reverse
spin (in this case, left) to the backspin, as shown by the purple path. The CB path can be shortened and
curved quite a lot with this technique. It is helpful to know and practice all of these techniques, because
sometimes a game situation will force you into one of these options.

                                       Diagram 1 Bending kick shots

     Diagram 2 illustrates two kick challenge shots that are fun to practice. The first, shown in black, is an 8-
ball game situation, shooting solids, where the 11, 12 and 13 block many possible shot paths leaving only the
one-rail kick at the 8 as shown. To an unexperienced eye, it might look impossible to curve the kick this
much; but when kicking into a rail with bottom spin at a shallow angle like this, the resulting bend can be quite
dramatic. A good challenge to practice is to see how far up table (above the corner pocket, if possible) you
can curve the CB by varying speed and the amount and type of spin.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      October, 2016
                                      Diagram 2 Kick challenge shots

    The shot shown in red in Diagram 2 is another fun kick challenge recommended to me by Bob Jewett.
The goal is to send the CB over the foot spot and kick off the end rail into the corner pocket, and do so with
the CB at the steepest angle possible. Now, don’t cheat. The cue must be kept as level as possible. As
demonstrated in NV H.2, with an elevated cue, you can swerve the CB and easily get the line of the shot past
the corner pocket. But again, that’s cheating. Check out the video to see the best I was able to achieve on
my table, and see if you can beat it. On most equipment, it should be possible to shoot from close to the
corner pocket and still bring the kick back along a similar line through the foot spot. Notice how the CB path
can curve backward as shown in the diagram. When you attempt the challenge, try to figure out what
combination of speed, bottom spin, and sidespin works best for you.

    Now let’s look at the bank shots in Diagram 3. The straight-back bank at the bottom comes can be
useful to know in the game of one-pocket, but it also comes up in other games. In NV H.2, we show several
variations of the shot for different CB and 13-ball positions. For the layout shown, the best approach is to
transfer sidespin to the 8 to shorten the rebound angle (AKA, “twist the ball”) and allow for easy clearance of
the CB under the shot. Both the cut angle and right spin transfer left spin to the 8, which can easily change
the rebound angle to make the shot go.

    The cross-side bank shown in Diagram 3 is a good example of what can be done to change the rebound
angle and path of a bank shot. As shown by the black path, a slow-roll bank that just clears the 11 goes just
long of the pocket. In situations like this, shortening the angle with fast speed (and/or spin transfer) is a good
option. As demonstrated in NV H.2, it is easy to clear the obstacle and pocket the bank, as shown by the red
path in the diagram. The path shown in blue illustrates what people refer to as “bending a bank short.”
Recently, there has been a huge debate on AZB and Facebook about the feasibility and efficacy of such an
approach. To help settle the debates, Bob Jewett and I posted a Bank Bend Challenge online (see NV H.4)
in an attempt to:
         1. See how much bend is possible.
         2. Find out what types of shots and equipment are most suitable for bending.
         3. Assess the difficulty and practicality of using bank bend effectively in a game situation where both
             accuracy and consistency are required.
We offered a $2000 prize to help encourage people to participate. If you want to learn more and see the
video entries, visit: billiards.colostate.edu/bend.html.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      October, 2016
                          Diagram 3 Shortening, twisting, and bending(?) bank shots

   Disappointingly, we did not get many successful entries to our Bank Bend Challenge. Regardless, here is
my conclusion after all of the debates:
                             It is possible to bend banks short under certain conditions,
                                but it is very difficult to do so reliably and consistently,
                   and it is extremely difficult on some equipment and under some conditions.
For more information, and to see examples of banks being bent short, see the “bending a bank” resource
page in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu. As demonstrated and described on the resource page,
sometimes people think banks are bending short when they really are not. A good example, shown in NV
H.3, is Freddy “The Beard’s” “bank benders” from his “Banks That Don’t Go – But Do!” DVD series. It might
look to Freddy and DVD viewers that those banks are bending, but they are not.

    The most important thing I learned from the Bank Bend Challenge is that you can’t always trust what you
see in videos, especially by people who have questionable ethics and impressive video-editing capabilities. A
user named “cleary” on AZB posted a video entry during our challenge that showed a ridiculous amount of
bank bend. I knew it was a fraud, but there were quite a few users (AKA the “angry mob”) who were
convinced the video was real, and they were attempting to bully Bob and I to “pay the man his money.”
Fortunately, after encouraging “cleary” to come clean, he eventually explained to everybody how he cheated
the video. The bogus video, along with a detailed explanation and illustration of how it was created, can be
found on the Bank Bend Challenge page at: billiards.colostate.edu/bend.html. If you haven’t seen this
“cheat” video yet, check it out. It is impressive (and scary) what can be done with video-editing software.

      As Freddy The Beard used to say: “Bank On Brother.” RIP Freddy. We miss you! And I wish you were
still around to submit your best bank-bend effort to our challenge.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                                 October, 2016
                    NV H.2 – Bending, Twisting, and Stiffening Kick and Bank Shots
                    NV H.3 – Pool Myth Buster - Bending Bank Shots
normal video        NV H.4 – $2000 Bank Bend Challenge

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-
author of the Video Encyclopedias of “Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Pool Practice (VEPP),” and “Eight
Ball (VEEB),” and the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS)” and “Billiard University (BU)”
instructional DVD series, all available at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     October, 2016
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/big_impact_technique_changes.pdf
title: Big Impact Technique Changes
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Big-Impact Technique Changes”                                            ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     I recently posted an online video (NV J.94) that discusses and demonstrates important technique
changes I have made to my game over the years that resulted in the most improvement. These changes
might help raise your game to the next level too. As shown in Image 1, the video features “Doofus Dave” (on
the left) who demonstrates how poorly I did things in the past, and “Dr. Dave” (on the right) who demonstrates
the effectiveness the new techniques.

                              Image 1 Video Title Screen Thumbnail Image

Align Vision Properly
     I used to align my head with the cue close to my dominant eye since that is what came naturally. But
what comes naturally isn’t always the most effective. I often missed shots because of this, especially long
shots. I noticed the problem one day when I was doing a stop-shot drill and I was sending the cue ball (CB)
to the right on every shot even though every shot looked straight to me. Once I found my true personal
“vision center,” I immediately started missing fewer shots. See the videos, articles, and other information on
the “vision center” resource page at billiards.colostate.edu if you want to learn more about how to find you
own personal “vision center” head position. Many people think and recommend that the cue should always
be centered between the eyes or be directly under or close to your “dominant” eye, but your personal vision
center position can be very unique and totally unrelated to which eye might be dominant or not.

Find Personal Best Stance
    I used to stand like old pool books and videos told me to stand, using a closed stance, bending at the
waist with the back leg locked, but it caused me lots of neck, back, and hamstring discomfort and chronic
pain, especially when I played often or in long sessions. Once I found my “personal best stance” using the

Billiards Digest                                                                                November, 2021
“stance dance” procedure demonstrated in the videos on the “stance advice” resource page, I no longer had
discomfort, and it became much easier to position my vision center accurately and consistently. This
definitely made my play better and more enjoyable. All resource pages mentioned in this article are linked in
the YouTube video description of NV J.94.

Aim While Standing
    I used to get down in my stance too quickly without aiming the shot carefully while standing. When I
aimed in my low stance position, I often missed shots, especially long back-cuts, because I wasn’t perceiving
the shot angle correctly. It is much more effective to aim and align while standing, where you can more
clearly see the shot, the line to the pocket, the ghost ball position, the shot angle, and the required line of aim
(see Image 2). I learned to aim while standing like most top players do. I also learned to trust and maintain
the required “shot picture” as I dropped straight down into my stance. “Aiming While Standing” might be the
one thing that has helped my game the most. For more information, see the DAM Aiming System Advice
resource page.

                                         Image 2 Aim While Standing

Use Smart Eye Pattern
     In my early days, I had a terrible “eye pattern,” not focusing very well on things that are important. I used
to move my eyes back and forth quickly while moving the cue during my pre-shot routine. I also didn’t lock
my focus on the OB target before my final stroke. Because I wasn’t checking the tip position and cue
alignment carefully, and because I wasn’t developing intense focus on my target, I was not very effective.
Once I learned to quiet my eyes and actually focus on the things that are important, I immediately got better.
Now I keep my cue still at address, carefully checking the tip position and making sure my cue is aligned with
the line of aim I established with my “Aim While Standing” “shot picture.” I also now lock my focus on the OB

Billiards Digest                                                                                    November, 2021
target as I drop down into my stance to help guide me down straight while maintaining the “shot picture.” And
I also lock my eyes on the OB target before my final stroke to have still and intense focus (see Image 3). All
these things resulted in better accuracy and consistency. For more information see the “Eye Pattern Best
Practices” resource page.

                                  Image 3 OB Focus Before Final Stroke

Billiards Digest                                                                                November, 2021
Keep Elbow Still
    In my early pool days, I was a “rail banger,” where I would move my shoulder and drop my elbow during
shots, causing the cue to sometimes slam into the rail, making a clanking sound (maybe you’re heard this
before). This made draw shots very difficult and inconsistent because if the elbow drops before the hit, the tip
comes up resulting in much less or no backspin. As demonstrated in the video, despite having a low tip
position at CB address, it is easy to hit the CB above center, resulting in a follow shot. I also sometimes
miscued on follow shots, with the tip rising above the ball. Once I learned to keep my shoulder and elbow
more still, with a pendulum stroke, my accuracy and consistency improved on every shot, especially, stun,
draw, and follow shots. For more information, see the “Elbow Drop” stroke “best practices” resource page.

Learn CB Control Principles
    In the past, I used to worry about scratching (or I did scratch), I couldn’t hit carom and kiss shots
effectively, and I had poor position-play skills. Now I use the 90˚ rule, the 30˚ rule, and the 3-times-the-angle
system (for draw shots) to accurately predict and create the CB motion I want over a wide range of shots. For
more information and system demonstrations, see the CB Control resource page. To be a good player, you
must have excellent CB control. You need to be able to pocket a ball, but you also need to be able to position
the CB well enough to be able to keep pocketing balls.

Control Shot Speed with Stroke Length
     I used to try to control shot speed using the same full stroke length with different stroke speeds.
Sometimes it would work; but other times, my finesse and consistency were terrible. A much better approach
is to pull back less for slower-speed shots and more for faster-speed shots, still accelerating smoothly the
same way on every shot. The changing stroke length automatically creates the desired speeds. It is like
putting or chipping in golf, where you control the ball travel distance by the amount you pull back the
clubhead. For more information and demonstrations, see the “Speed Control Advice” resource page.

    Everything mentioned in this article is clearly demonstrated in online video NV J.94, so be sure to check it
out. And more importantly, give everything a try at the table, especially if you think something might help your
game. Also, if you want to learn more, the resource pages mentioned in this article and linked in the YouTube
video description cover everything in great detail with lots of good examples. I hope you enjoy the video, and
I hope the things that helped me so much over the years help you too.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.94 – Changes in Your Pool Game that Can Have the Biggest Impact
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    November, 2021
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/billiard_university_bu_part_i_introduction.pdf
title: Billiard University BU Part I Introduction
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Billiard University (BU) – Part I: Introduction”                           ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

    This is the first in a series of articles dealing with the Billiard University (BU). The BU was cofounded by
myself and Randy Russell (a Canadian instructor), and we just launched the website recently. Also involved
are a “dream team” of well-known and respected instructors and instructional authors: Jerry Briesath, Mark
Finkelstein, Randy Goettlicher, Bob Jewett, Mike Page, Tom Simpson, and Mark Wilson. The mission of the
BU is to provide assessment tools, a rating system, and learning resources to help pool players strive for and
achieve excellence, and to officially acknowledge excellence through the awarding of diplomas (Bachelors,
Masters, or Doctorate of Pool). All of the assessment tools, with detailed instructions and demonstrations, are
available on the BU website at: BilliardUniversity.org.

      The BU exams have been carefully designed and tested to provide a complete and accurate assessment
and rating of pool-playing ability. The examination process is broken into two parts, both of which consist of
drills and challenges at the table. The first portion (Exam I – Fundamentals) is a fundamentals assessment
and placement examination that measures all important basic pool skills (aim, alignment, stroke, ball
pocketing, speed control, and cue ball control). The second portion (Exam II – Skills) is a skills proficiency
examination that tests specific skills important in a variety of game situations (position play, strategy,
defensive play, kicks, banks, jacked-up shots, jumps, and the break).

     There are three levels of Exam II (Skills) labeled Bachelors, Masters, and Doctorate. The score on Exam
I determines which Exam II the student is placed into based on the demonstrated level of ability. All three
Skills Exams test the complete set of pool skills necessary to be a good pool player, albeit at different levels.
The drills are consistent, but with increasing difficulty, from one diploma level to the next. This provides a
natural and simple progression path as a student advances through the diploma levels, and the increasing
difficulty encourages and assesses continued improvement.

    The total combined score on Exam I and Exam II provides a single number corresponding to different
levels of playing ability. Also, the total score (regardless of Exam II placement) indicates the player rating and
diploma achieved directly. Unlike league handicap systems and other match-statistics-based rating systems,
the BU scoring and rating system is independent of league competition level, which can vary significantly from
one league to the next and from one region to the next. The BU rating offers the significant advantage that it
is based solely on individual performance and not on the performance of others. Therefore, the ratings are
meaningful across all regions and internationally.

    Everything needed to prepare for and take the exams is available for free online, including exam
documents with diagrams and instructions, video explanations and demonstrations, score sheets, online
resources, and electronic forms for submitting results and applying for a diploma. If you want to try the BU
exams and rating system, or if you want to become a BU instructor, please visit the BU website. Online
videos NV D.1-D.14 demonstrate and explain every step of the process.

    Diagram 1 shows an example drill from Exam I. There are eight drills total. Like many of the drills in
Exam I, this drill is “progressive” because it automatically adjusts to your level of performance. Starting with
the CB in position 4, you get 10 shots. The goal no each shot is to pocket the object ball (OB) in the corner
and have the cue ball (CB) stop within a ball of the ghost-ball position (i.e., the shot should be very close to a
pure “stop shot”). With each success, you move the CB farther from the OB to the next higher CB position
(e.g., from 4 to 5); and with each miss, you move the CB closer to the OB in the next lower CB position (e.g.,
from 4 to 3). If you pocket the ball from position 7, the CB remains there, but you receive a bonus point for
each success at 7. The score for the drill is the CB position after the 10th shot plus the number of bonus
points, not to exceed a maximum allowed total of 10.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      August, 2013
                              Diagram 1 Progressive Practice Stop Shot Drill

      In NV D.4, we show examples of all of the drills along with examples of how to score them. The other
progressive-practice drills in Exam I, in addition to the stop shot drill, test pocketing, draw, follow, stun, and
speed control skills. The remaining drills cover basic CB position control. Diagram 2 shows one of these
drills. The goal is to pocket the OB in the corner and send the CB to each of the 5 targets. You get 4 tries at
each for a maximum possible score of 20. Having 4 attempts at each gives you the opportunity to make
adjustments based on how earlier shots go. That’s part of the test ... how well you learn and adjust to
conditions.

                                         Diagram 2 Target Pool Drill

    Diagram 3 shows various position-route options for target position 2. An obvious approach here is to
draw the CB straight into the target (see the red path). This might seem easy on paper, but it requires good
control of both speed and tip position to be accurate and consistent. Another approach is to use less draw,

Billiards Digest                                                                                      August, 2013
which might be easier to control, and bounce off the side cushion (see the blue path). The cushion can help
slow and flatten the path of the CB a little, which can increase the margin for error slightly. A totally different
approach is to come off the end rail with left sidespin (see the black path). An advantage of this approach is
that both the end and side cushions help kill the CB, as the left spin creates a good angle to the target,
providing a wide margin for error with speed. If you have an accurate and consistent draw stroke, this is
probably the best approach for target 2. For more details and advice, and to see other options, see NV D.4.

                                  Diagram 3 Options for Target Position 2

      Diagram 4 shows various options for target position 4. One is to use a stun shot to send the CB along
the tangent line, which takes a good path to the target (see the rad path). Another option is to roll the CB
across the table twice, which also offers a natural path (see the blue path). However, this approach will be a
little sensitive to the exact cut angle (with pocket cheating) and amount of sidespin (intentional or not). A
more natural path is to roll the CB slowly with running english to take a good line into the diagonal of the
target to maximize the margin for error with speed. This shot takes touch, and the amount of sidespin
required will vary some with conditions, but it is a very natural shot. Again, for more details and advice, and to
see other options, see NV D.4.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       August, 2013
                                    Diagram 4 Options for Target Position 4

    Practice all of the position route options shown in NV D.4 for all of the target positions and try to think of
others. Another good CB position control challenge on the first exam is the classic “Wagon Wheel” drill. If
you want some advice and help on this drill refer to my June ‘12 article, NV C.5, and NV D.10.

   If you need encouragement to work on the BU Exams, here is the list of benefits outlined on the BU
website:

     •    You will get better at pool in a smarter and faster way and raise your game to the next level.
     •    The examination process fully and impartially assesses your current rating and level of ability relative
          to others.
     •    The exam drills identify your areas of weakness.
     •    The exam drills can provide structure and purpose to your practice sessions.
     •    You can use the exam and drill scores to monitor and assess your improvement over time.
     •    You can set a concrete goal for improvement by working toward a diploma.
     •    When you earn a diploma, you can frame and display it with pride (e.g., in your office or game room)
          to show off your enthusiasm and excellence.
     •    With a diploma, you will receive official recognition of your level of ability on the BU website (with your
          permission).
     •    A diploma is a credential you can use as the first step to becoming a BU instructor.

     I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles dealing with the Billiard University, and I hope you
try the BU Exams and use them as a training tool. Good luck with your practice, and I look forward to
awarding you a pool diploma someday. It’s time to graduate your game to the next level.

Good luck with your game,
Dean Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                                          August, 2013
                 NV C.5 – Wagon wheel cue ball control drill, from VEPP II
                 NV D.1 – Billiard University - Part 1: Introduction - overview of the BU process for earning a pool
                 diploma
                 NV D.2 – Billiard University - Part 2: Table Setup - preparing to practice and take the BU exams
                 NV D.3 – Billiard University - Part 3: Video Recording - recording official exam runs for online
                 submittal
                 NV D.4 – Billiard University - Part 4: Exam I Overview - demonstrations and scoring of the
                 Fundamentals Exam
                 NV D.5 – Billiard University - Part 5: Exam II Overview - demonstrations and scoring of the Skills
                 Exam
                 NV D.6 – Billiard University - Part 6: Submittal and Wrap Up - applying for a BU diploma online
normal video     NV D.7 – Pool Fundamentals - The Stance - from Vol-I of the Billiard University instructional DVD
                 series
                 NV D.8 – Stun Shot Drill - from Vol-II of the Billiard University instructional DVD series
                 NV D.9 – How to Aim Pool Shots - from Vol-II of the Billiard University instructional DVD series
                 NV D.10 – Draw Shot Trisect Aiming System - from Vol-II of the Billiard University instructional DVD
                 series
                 NV D.11 – Cue Ball Control Target Pool Drill - from Vol-II of the Billiard University instructional DVD
                 series
                 NV D.12 – Safety Drill - from Vol-III of the Billiard University instructional DVD series
                 NV D.13 – Kick Shot Aiming Systems - from Vol-III of the Billiard University instructional DVD series
                 NV D.14 – Pool Break Technique Advice - from Vol-III of the Billiard University instructional DVD
                 series

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-
author of “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool
Practice (VEPP),” and the “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                            August, 2013
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/billiard_university_bu_part_ii_skills_exam.pdf
title: Billiard University BU Part Ii Skills Exam
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Billiard University (BU) – Part II: Skills Exam”                             ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

    This is the second in a series of articles dealing with the Billiard University (BU). The mission of the BU is
to provide assessment tools, a rating system, and learning resources to help pool players strive for and
achieve excellence, and to officially acknowledge excellence through the awarding of diplomas (Bachelors,
Masters, or Doctorate of Pool). The BU was cofounded by myself and Randy Russell, with support from a
“dream team” of well-known and respected instructors and instructional authors: Jerry Briesath, Mark
Finkelstein, Randy Goettlicher, Bob Jewett, Mike Page, Tom Simpson, and Mark Wilson. Online videos NV
D.1-D.6 explain every step of the BU process and demonstrate the BU playing-ability exams, which are
available for free on the BU website: BilliardUniversity.org. Online videos NV D.7-D.14 include excerpts
from the 3-DVD BU Instructional series that provides advice for improving your fundamentals, teaches useful
aiming systems for various types of shots, and offers “hot tips” for how to do well on the exams. Last month, I
described the BU exam structure and showed example drills from the Fundamentals Exam (Exam I). This
month, we’ll look at two drills from the BU Skills Exam (Exam II).

    Diagram 1 shows the first drill in Exam II. It is the classic line-of-balls run-out drill. Starting with ball in
hand, the goal is to run out the balls in rotation. You can pot each ball in any pocket, but you are not allowed
to disturb any of the remaining balls. As with all of the Exam II drills, the difficulty level and number of points
available vary with Exam level. The version shown in the diagram is the Masters version. The Bachelors
version has fewer balls with larger gaps, and the Doctorate version has more balls closer together.
Remember, the score on Exam I places you into the appropriate Exam II level based on your performance.

                                Diagram 1 Line-of-balls drill starting options

    Diagram 1 shows several alternatives for the first shot. A draw shot from cue ball (CB) position “A” is one
option (see the red CB path). Another option is to roll forward and cross to the other side of the ball line from
CB position “B” (see the black CB path) This option works well for the Bachelors and Masters levels but it is

Billiards Digest                                                                                     September, 2013
too risky in the Doctorate level where there is less space between the 1 ball and 2 ball. Another approach is
to use outside follow to roll up on the same side of the balls (see the blue CB path from CB position “C”). Try
these and other options and determine which works best for you. Regardless of the option you choose, make
sure you don’t come up short on position for the 2 ball. If you leave the wrong angle, you might be forced into
a low-percentage bank shot to avoid contact with the 3.

     Diagram 2 shows several alternatives for the middle balls (2 through 5), in this case ball 4. If you are far
enough above the 4-ball line to the pocket, as in CB position “A,” you can use straight follow to come up for
the next ball (see the red CB path). If you are shooting from a CB position like “B,” an option is to use inside
follow to come off two rails into the line of the next shot in the side pocket (see the black CB path). This offers
a large margin for error with shot speed. The side pockets can sometimes be easier for getting position,
especially on the later balls. From CB position “C,” depending on the exact angle and the gap between the 4
and 5, you could roll forward for a shot at the 5 in the lower side pocket. Instead, you could also draw back
(see the blue CB path). Again, if you are playing position for a corner pocket, make sure come up high
enough for the next ball. Generally, you should plan to come above the line of the next shot (see the grey line
through the 5 ball). Again, there are many options for CB control in this drill, and you will need to experiment
during practice to see what works best for you.

                              Diagram 2 Line-of-balls drill middle-ball options

   In NV D.5, we show examples of all of the Exam II drills along with how to score them. Try the different
approaches demonstrated for various positions in the line-of-balls drill and see what is most consistent and
accurate for you. For more information and advice on how to approach the line-of-balls drill, especially the
Doctorate version, see NV C.8 and my September ’12 article, both of which cover the drill in more detail.

     Diagram 3 shows the fifth of the ten drills in Exam II. This drill gives practice and tests skill with safety
play. The goal is to hide the 1-ball from the CB, using the cluster of 9 balls as blockers. You are allowed to
contact the rack of balls but all of them must remain within or overlapping the rectangle target. You get 2
attempts from each CB position. In the Doctorate version of the exam, you shoot from each of the seven CB
positions shown. In the Bachelors version, only three CB positions are used (2, 5, and 6); and in the Masters,
five are used (1, 2, 4, 5, and 6). The difficulty level associated with the CB positions increases with exam
level.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    September, 2013
                                                Diagram 3 @@@

     Diagram 3 shows possible shots for three of the CB positions (1, 3, and 5). From CB position “1,” a good
approach is to hit about a third of the 1 ball with running follow sending the CB off 3 rails into the line of the
blockers, leaving the 1-ball up table, ideally also along this line (see the black ball paths). This path offers a
fairly good margin for error with speed assuming the shot angle and spin are good. The shot from position “3”
uses inside follow to send the CB and 1-ball to opposite sides of the obstacle cluster (see the red paths),
again offering a good margin for error with speed. The shot from position “5” is a simple roll shot. Here, the
1-ball is sent off the end rail into the line of the blockers, with the CB also ending up close to this line. Again,
this approach offers a fairly wide margin for error. Again, practice these and other paths and determine which
are the most accurate and consistent for you. Online video NV D.12 demonstrates several options for each of
the seven CB positions. Practice all of these to improve your confident and effective with safety shots.

     I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles dealing with the Billiard University Exams and
instructional DVD series, and I hope you try the exams and use them as a training tool. Good luck with your
practice, and I look forward to awarding you a pool diploma someday. It’s time to graduate your game to the
next level.

Good luck with your game,
Dean Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                                     September, 2013
                 NV C.8 – Line-of-balls position control drill, from VEPP II
                 NV D.1 – Billiard University - Part 1: Introduction - overview of the BU process for earning a pool
                 diploma
                 NV D.2 – Billiard University - Part 2: Table Setup - preparing to practice and take the BU exams
                 NV D.3 – Billiard University - Part 3: Video Recording - recording official exam runs for online
                 submittal
                 NV D.4 – Billiard University - Part 4: Exam I Overview - demonstrations and scoring of the
                 Fundamentals Exam
                 NV D.5 – Billiard University - Part 5: Exam II Overview - demonstrations and scoring of the Skills
                 Exam
                 NV D.6 – Billiard University - Part 6: Submittal and Wrap Up - applying for a BU diploma online
normal video     NV D.7 – Pool Fundamentals - The Stance - from Vol-I of the Billiard University instructional DVD
                 series
                 NV D.8 – Stun Shot Drill - from Vol-II of the Billiard University instructional DVD series
                 NV D.9 – How to Aim Pool Shots - from Vol-II of the Billiard University instructional DVD series
                 NV D.10 – Draw Shot Trisect Aiming System - from Vol-II of the Billiard University instructional DVD
                 series
                 NV D.11 – Cue Ball Control Target Pool Drill - from Vol-II of the Billiard University instructional DVD
                 series
                 NV D.12 – Safety Drill - from Vol-III of the Billiard University instructional DVD series
                 NV D.13 – Kick Shot Aiming Systems - from Vol-III of the Billiard University instructional DVD series
                 NV D.14 – Pool Break Technique Advice - from Vol-III of the Billiard University instructional DVD
                 series

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-
author of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice
(VEPP),” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         September, 2013
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/billiard_university_bu_part_iii_player_rating.pdf
title: Billiard University BU Part Iii Player Rating
topics: technical_proofs, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Billiard University (BU) – Part III: Player Rating”                          ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

    This is the third in a series of articles dealing with the Billiard University (BU). The mission of the BU is to
provide assessment tools, a rating system, and learning resources to help pool players strive for and achieve
excellence, and to officially acknowledge excellence through the awarding of diplomas (Bachelors, Masters,
or Doctorate of Pool). The BU was cofounded by me and Randy Russell, with support from a “dream team” of
well-known and respected instructors and instructional authors: Jerry Briesath, Mark Finkelstein, Randy
Goettlicher, Bob Jewett, Mike Page, Tom Simpson, and Mark Wilson. Online videos NV D.1-D.6 explain
every step of the BU process and demonstrate the BU playing-ability exams, which are available for free on
the BU website: BilliardUniversity.org. NV D.7-D.14 include excerpts from the 3-DVD BU Instructional
series that provides advice for improving your fundamentals, teaches useful aiming systems for various types
of shots, and offers “hot tips” for how to do well on the exams. In the last two months, I described the BU
exam structure and showed example drills from both the Fundamentals Exam (Exam I) and the Skills Exam
(Exam II). This month, I’ll cover at how to determine your BU score and player rating. We’ll also look at how
to use your exam results and the BU learning resources to help you improve your game.

    Remember, the score you get on the Fundamentals Exam (Exam I) places you into the appropriate Skills
Exam (Exam II) based on the score ranges in Table 1. The sum of the Exam I and Exam II scores is your BU
score, which corresponds directly to your level of playing ability as indicated by the ranges in Table 2. For
example, if your score on the Fundamentals Exam is 65, you qualify for the Masters level Exam II. If your
score on the Exam II is 55, your BU Score would be 120 (65 + 55). This would classify you as an “advanced -
level 1” (lower intermediate) player. This corresponds to a “B” or “B-” on the traditional A/B/C/D player-rating
scale. The BU score also indicates whether or not you qualify for a BU diploma according to the score ranges
in Table 3. The BU score of 135 would qualify you for a “Master of Pool with Honors” diploma.

    There is a ratings comparison table on the BU website that correlates the BU score and rating with other
common rating and league handicap systems. However, unlike league handicap and other match-statistics-
based rating systems, the BU scoring and rating system is independent of league competition level which can
vary significantly from one league to the next and from one region to the next. The BU rating offers the
significant advantage that it is based solely on individual performance and not on the performance of others.
Therefore, the ratings are meaningful across all regions and internationally.

                           Table 1 Exam II placement based on the Exam I score
                                Exam I score       0-49        50-69      70-100
                                  Exam II        Bachelors    Masters    Doctorate

Billiards Digest                                                                                       October, 2013
                                      Table 2 BU player rating score ranges

                           BU               BU                 Traditional                 A/B/C/D
                         Score            Player                   Player                   Rating
                                          Level                    Level
                      180-200             pro                 touring pro (pro)             A+++
                      160-179          semi pro              semi pro (master)            A++ (AAA)
                      140-159         advanced-3        tournament player (expert)        A+ (AA) / A
                      125-139         advanced-2              upper advanced                A- / B+
                      110-124         advanced-1              lower advanced                B / B-
                       95-109       intermediate-3          upper intermediate             B- / C+
                        70-94       intermediate-2           mid intermediate               C+ / C
                        55-69       intermediate-1          lower intermediate                 C
                        40-54         beginner-3                upper novice                  C-
                        30-39         beginner-2                 mid novice                   D+
                        20-29         beginner-1                lower novice                   D
                         0-19         beginner-0            absolute beginner                 D-

                                 Table 3 BU diploma qualification score ranges
              BU Score      55-84             85-99     100-124      125-139          140-179       180-200
                                           Bachelor                    Master                       Doctorate
               Diploma     Bachelor                      Master                      Doctorate
                                             of Pool                   of Pool                        of Pool
               Awarded      of Pool                      of Pool                      of Pool
                                          with Honors               with Honors                    with Honors

      The assessment nature of the BU Exams can be very useful to help you identify your strengths and
weaknesses. And the exam drills provide a good workout to help you develop and improve skills in a
methodical and purposeful way. You should especially work on drills for which you receive low scores,
indicating weaknesses in certain skills areas. If you need instruction or advice related to any of the required
skills, the Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS) and the Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice
(VEPP) provide focused and specific learning resources. These DVD series include detailed and well-
illustrated instruction, countless game-situation examples, and collections of drills to help you develop and
improve skills in all areas. Table 3 and Table 4 identify the skills important to each BU Exam drill. They also
list the VEPS and VEPP disc and section numbers to help you locate the relevant learning resources.

                     Table 3 Fundamentals Exam (Exam I) drills and learning resources
            drill number    drill topic           required skills           VEPS Sections         VEPP Sections
                  F1            cut                aiming, stroke                    I-1                I-2
                  F2           stop              stop shot control                   I-2                I-4
                  F3          follow               follow control                    I-3                I-5
                  F4           draw                 draw control                     I-4                I-6
                  F5           stun         stun control, speed control         I-2, II-14             II-8
                  F6         potting               aiming, stroke                    I-1                I-2
                  F7         wagon             CB direction control                II-14               II-9
                  F8          target        position and speed control      II-15, II-16, II-17       II-13

Billiards Digest                                                                                             October, 2013
                             Table 3 Skills Exam (Exam II) drills and learning resources
     drill                                                                                VEPS           VEPP
                      drill topic                  required skills
   number                                                                               Sections       Sections
     S1               line of balls             aiming, position control               II-14, II-15       II-16
     S2                  rail cuts              aiming, position control                   II-13          II-16
     S3             9-ball patterns          position control and strategy          II-15-17, III-27     III-18
     S4             8-ball patterns          position control and strategy          II-15-17, III-26     III-19
     S5                  safeties     safety strategy, position and speed control         III-21         III-20
     S6                    kicks                       kick shots                         IV-31          IV-21
     S7                   banks                        bank shots                         IV-33          IV-24
     S8              elevated cue                  elevated cue shots                   I-4, V-42        IV-25
     S9             jumps, massé           jump, swerve, and massé shots                V-42, 43       IV-26, 27
     S10                  break                        break shot                          V-44           V-28

    If you haven’t taken the BU playing-ability and rating exams yet, give them a try. Everything you need to
prepare for and take the exams is available for free on the BU website (BilliardUniversity.org). It’s time to
see where you rank and work to graduate your game to the next level.

Good luck with your game,
Dean Dave

                 NV D.1 – BU - Part 1: Introduction - overview of the BU process for earning a pool diploma
                 NV D.2 – BU - Part 2: Table Setup - preparing to practice and take the BU exams
                 NV D.3 – BU - Part 3: Video Recording - recording official exam runs for online submittal
                 NV D.4 – BU - Part 4: Exam I Overview - demonstrations and scoring of the Fundamentals Exam
                 NV D.5 – BU - Part 5: Exam II Overview - demonstrations and scoring of the Skills Exam
                 NV D.6 – BU - Part 6: Submittal and Wrap Up - applying for a BU diploma online
                 NV D.7 – Pool Fundamentals - The Stance - from Vol-I of the BU instructional DVD series
normal video
                 NV D.8 – Stun Shot Drill - from Vol-II of the Billiard University instructional DVD series
                 NV D.9 – How to Aim Pool Shots - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.10 – Draw Shot Trisect Aiming System - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.11 – Cue Ball Control Target Pool Drill - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.12 – Safety Drill - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.13 – Kick Shot Aiming Systems - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.14 – Pool Break Technique Advice - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-
author of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice
(VEPP),” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        October, 2013
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/billiard_university_bu_part_iv_table_difficulty.pdf
title: Billiard University BU Part Iv Table Difficulty
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
“Billiard University (BU) – Part IV: Table Difficulty”                       ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the fourth in a series of articles dealing with the Billiard University (BU). The mission of the BU is
to provide assessment tools, a rating system, and learning resources to help pool players strive for and
achieve excellence, and to officially acknowledge excellence through the awarding of diplomas (Bachelors,
Masters, or Doctorate of Pool). The BU was cofounded by me and Randy Russell, with support from a
“dream team” of well-known and respected instructors and instructional authors: Jerry Briesath, Mark
Finkelstein, Randy Goettlicher, Bob Jewett, Mike Page, Tom Simpson, and Mark Wilson. Online videos NV
D.1-D.6 explain every step of the BU process and demonstrate the BU playing-ability exams, which are
available for free on the BU website: BilliardUniversity.org. NV D.7-D.14 include excerpts from the 3-DVD
BU Instructional series that provides advice for improving your fundamentals, teaches useful aiming systems
for various types of shots, and offers “hot tips” for how to do well on the exams. In the last few months, we’ve
looked at the BU exams and how to determine your player rating. This month, we’ll look at how to take table
difficulty into consideration.

     Have you ever wondered how “tough” a table is, and why? There are many factors that affect how
difficult a table plays. They include:
          • table size
          • pocket size, facing angles, and shelf depth
          • pocket facing and shim properties and condition
          • cloth and ball type and condition
          • rail and cushion conditions
          • table levelness
          • temperature and humidity
          • etc!!!!

    Table toughness also depends on a particular player, their style of play, and the game being played. For
example for 8-ball, a top player would probably prefer a larger table with less clustering and traffic, and the
size of the pockets is probably less a concern (as long as they are not too small). And for a mediocre player,
9-ball would be much easier on a smaller table; although, the size of the pockets can be a huge effect.

    Recently, I developed a Table Difficulty Factor (TDF) to characterize table “toughness.” The TDF is a
percentage measure of how difficult or easy a particular table plays based on table size and three simple
corner-pocket measurements: mouth size, throat size, and shelf depth (see Diagram 1). These factors were
chosen because they are most responsible for how difficult a table plays, they depend only on the table
design and construction, they are relatively easy to measure and characterize in a non-subjective way, and
they don't vary with conditions (which can sometimes change on a daily basis). I'm not implying by this
choice that other effects are not important. For example, a slow, non-level table with draggy cloth, dead rails,
and pockets that spit out almost everything due to dirtiness, humidity and weird facings is no picnic.
However, I wanted to keep things as simple as possible while still providing a meaningful and non-subjective
comparison of tables, independent of “conditions.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                    November, 2013
                                      Diagram 1 Pocket Measurments

     As shown in Diagram 1, if the cushion is not 2” (5.1cm) thick, the throat size is measured 2” (5.1 cm)
back from the cushion noses. You can lay down Post-It Notes or masking tape to better define the lines and
intersection points to help with the mouth and throat measurements. If you have an angle-measurement
device, you can measure the facing angle directly instead of measuring the throat size (see TP B.15 to see
how facing angle and throat size are related). The shelf depth should be measured from the pocket mouth
line to the slate top lip edge (where the pocket opening first starts).

    The table difficulty factor (TDF) is calculated based on four factors: table size factor (TSF), pocket size
factor (PSF), pocket angle factor (PAF), and pocket shelf factor (PLF). Each factor is a number less than,
equal to, or greater than 1, where 1 indicates average or standard (based on the WPA equipment spec
standards). By multiplying the four factors, you get the TDF which is a good measure of table “toughness.” If
TDF=1, the table has an average level of difficulty; if TDF>1, the table plays more difficult than average; and if
TDF<1, the table plays easier than average. The values used for the four factors are summarized in Tables
1-4. All of the numbers were chosen carefully based on how each factor affects the margin of error for a wide
range of shots (per the analyses in TP 3.4 and TP 3.6). Some judgment based on experience and
discussions with others (mostly Mark Finkelstein Mike Page, and Bob Jewett) also came into play. I want to
thank everybody who contributed insight and provided feedback, especially the many AZB online forum users
who offered useful input. If you want to learn more about the rationale and logic used to determine the factor
values, search for and read through the Table Difficulty thread on the AZB online forum.

                                       Table 1 Table Size Factor (TSF)

                                             playing area dimensions                      table size factor
               table size
                                              (cushion nose to nose)                            (TSF)
           12 ft (gigantic)               140" x 70" (355.6cm x 177.8cm)                         1.25
          10 ft (oversized)               112" x 56" (284.5cm x 142.2cm)                         1.10
        9 ft (regulation size)            100” x 50” (254.0cm x 127.0cm)                         1.00
              8 ft+ (pro 8)                92" x 46" (233.7cm x 116.8cm)                         0.95
           8 ft (home table)               88" x 44" (223.5cm x 111.7cm)                         0.90
       6 ft or 7 ft ("bar box")   72-84" x 36-42" (182.9-213.4cm x 91.4-106.7cm)                 0.85

Billiards Digest                                                                                    November, 2013
                                                                   Table 2 Pocket Size Factor (PSF)
                       > 3 3/8”   > 3 1/2”   > 3 5/8”   > 3 3/4”      > 3 7/8”      > 4”      > 4 1/8”    > 4 1/4”      > 4 3/8”       > 4 1/2”     > 4 3/4”      > 5”
pocket                 (8.6cm)    (8.9cm)    (9.2cm)    (9.5cm)       (9.8cm)    (10.2cm)    (10.5cm)    (10.8cm)      (11.1cm)       (11.4cm)     (12.1cm)    (12.7cm)
            ≤ 3 3/8“                                                                                                                                                        > 5 1/4”
mouth                    and        and        and        and           and         and         and         and           and            and          and         and
            (8.6cm)                                                                                                                                                        (13.3cm)
 size                  ≤ 3 1/2”   ≤ 3 5/8”   ≤ 3 3/4”   ≤ 3 7/8”        ≤ 4”      ≤ 4 1/8”    ≤ 4 1/4”    ≤ 4 3/8”      ≤ 4 1/2”       ≤ 4 3/4”       ≤ 5”      ≤ 5 1/4”
                       (8.9cm)    (9.2cm)    (9.5cm)    (9.8cm)      (10.2cm)    (10.5cm)    (10.8cm)    (11.1cm)      (11.4cm)       (12.1cm)     (12.7cm)    (13.3cm)
pocket
 size
              1.55      1.46       1.38       1.31       1.25          1.20        1.15        1.10          1.05          1.00         0.95         0.91        0.88        0.85
factor
(PSF)

                                                                 Table 3 Pocket Angle Factor (PAF)
                                                          > 1”         > 7/8”        > 3/4”        > 5/8”        > 1/2”             > 3/8”        > 1/4”
                     pocket
                                                        (25mm)        (22mm)        (19mm)        (16mm)        (13mm)              (9mm)         (6mm)
            mouth-throat difference          > 1 1/4”                                                                                                            ≤ 1/4”
                                                          and           and           and           and           and                 and           and
             2” (5.1cm) back from            (32mm)                                                                                                             (6mm)
                                                        ≤ 1 1/4”        ≤ 1”         ≤ 7/8”        ≤ 3/4”        ≤ 5/8”              ≤ 1/2”        ≤ 3/8”
              the cushion noses
                                                        (32mm)        (25mm)        (22mm)        (19mm)        (16mm)             (13mm)         (9mm)
               pocket facing angle
                                                        > 143.5º      > 142.6º      > 141.7º     > 140.7º       > 139.6º          > 138.6º        > 137.0º
               (can measure directly
                                             > 145.3º     and           and           and          and            and               and             and        ≤ 137.0º
           instead of using the mouth-
                                                        ≤ 145.3º      ≤ 143.5º      ≤ 142.6º     ≤ 141.7º       ≤ 140.7º          ≤ 139.6º        ≤ 138.6º
                 throat difference)
            pocket          PSF≤0.90          1.09        1.07          1.05          1.03            1.01          1.00            0.98           0.96          0.94
             angle      0.90<PSF<1.10         1.14        1.10          1.07          1.04            1.02          1.00            0.98           0.97          0.95
             factor
             (PAF)          PSF≥1.10          1.20        1.14          1.09          1.05            1.02          1.00            0.99           0.98          0.97

                                                                   Table 4 Pocket Shelf Factor (PSF)
                                                                                      >2”         >1 3/4”       > 1 1/2”          > 1 1/4”
                                                                                    (51mm)        (44mm)        (38mm)            (32mm)
                                            pocket                      > 2 1/4"                                                               ≤ 1 1/4”
                                                                                      and           and           and               and
                                          shelf depth                   (57mm)                                                                 (32mm)
                                                                                    ≤ 2 1/4”        ≤ 2”        ≤ 1 3/4”          ≤ 1 1/2”
                                                                                    (57mm)        (51mm)        (44mm)            (38mm)
                                                 PSF≤0.90 or
                                                                          1.07        1.03         1.01             1.00           0.97           0.93
                                                  PAF≤0.90
                           pocket shelf      0.90<PSF<1.10 and
                                                                          1.10        1.05         1.03             1.00           0.98           0.95
                           factor (PLF)        0.90<PAF<1.10
                                                 PSF≥1.10 or
                                                                          1.15        1.07         1.03             1.00           0.99           0.98
                                                  PAF≥1.10
Billiards Digest                                                                                                November, 2013
     Again, the table difficulty factor is calculated by multiplying each of the measured factors:
                                              TDF = TSF x PSF x PAF x PLF

Table 5 lists typical measurements and TDF values for a wide range of common tables. For example, for a
Bonus Ball table, the table size is 9’ (TSF = 1.00 from Table 1), the pocket mouth size is 3 7/8” (PSF = 1.25 from
Table 2), the throat size is 3 3/4" giving a mouth-throat difference (3 7/8” – 3 3/4”) of 1/8” (PAF = 0.97 from Table
3), and the shelf depth is 3/4" (PLF = 0.98 from Table 4). This gives a table difficulty factor of: 1.00 x 1.25 x 0.97
x 0.98 = 1.19. This implies that a Bonus Ball table plays about 19% tougher than a WPA-spec “standard” table.
Based on the numbers in Table 5, a Pro-Cut Diamond (TDF=1.07) is about 7% tougher and a typical 8’ home
table (0.84) is about 16% easier than a WPA-spec table.

                                      Table 5 Table Difficulty Factor (TDF) Examples

                                             pocket mouth        mouth-throat         shelf depth:         table difficulty
    table type          table size: TSF
                                               size: PSF        difference: PAF           PLF               factor (TDF)

 tough 10’ table           10': 1.10            4": 1.20           3/4": 1.02            1 7/8": 1.03            1.39

Bonus Ball table           9': 1.00           3 7/8": 1.25         1/8": 0.97            3/4": 0.98              1.19

     Pro-Cut
                           9': 1.00           4 1/2": 1.00          1": 1.07             1 3/4": 1.00            1.07
     Diamond

    WPA-spec
                           9': 1.00           4 7/16": 1.00       9/16": 1.00            1 5/8": 1.00            1.00
    "standard"

Brunswick Gold
                           9': 1.00           4 7/8": 0.91         3/4": 1.02            1 1/2": 0.98            0.91
    Crown

  8’ home table            8': 0.90           4 3/4": 0.95         5/8": 1.00            1 3/8": 0.98            0.84

 Valley/Dynamo
                           7': 0.85           4 1/2": 1.00          0": 0.95             3/4": 0.95              0.77
    “bar box”

    One way the TDF can be used is to adjust numbers from any scoring or rating system like the BU Exams,
“playing the ghost” drills, the Hopkins Q Skills drill, or the Fargo rating drill (for detailed descriptions of each, see
the “rating systems resource page” in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu). An effective score, taking
table difficulty into consideration, can be calculated with:
                                          (effective score) = (raw score) x TDF
An alternative is to just determine a qualitative descriptor for the table based on the TDF ranges in Table 6.
These descriptors can help put a score or rating in better perspective. For example, a BU score of 160 on a “very
tough” table is much more impressive than a 160 on a “very easy” table. Applying the Table 6 descriptors to the
tables in Table 5, a Bonus Ball table would be classified as “very tough” and a Valley/Dynamo “bar box” would be
classified as “very easy.” And a Pro-Cut Diamond is “tough” compared to “easy” for a Gold Crown.”

                                           Table 6 TDF qualitative descriptors
              TDF          < 0.70       0.70-0.85   0.85-0.95    0.95-1.05      1.05-1.15     1.15-1.30      > 1.30
             table           too           very                                                  very          too
                                                      easy        average        tough
           difficulty       easy          easy                                                  tough        tough

    Where does the table you usually play on fall on the TDF scale? When you get a chance, take some
measurements and calculate the TDF and see how it compares to some of the typical tables in Table 5. Also, if
you haven’t taken the BU playing-ability and rating exams yet, give them a try. Everything you need to prepare
for and take the exams is available for free on the BU website (BilliardUniversity.org). It’s time to see where

Billiards Digest                                                                                          November, 2013
you rank and work to graduate your game to the next level. Just don’t try to boost your ego by taking the exams
on a table that is “too easy.”

Good luck with your game,
Dean Dave

                  NV D.1 – BU - Part 1: Introduction - overview of the BU process for earning a pool diploma
                  NV D.2 – BU - Part 2: Table Setup - preparing to practice and take the BU exams
                  NV D.3 – BU - Part 3: Video Recording - recording official exam runs for online submittal
                  NV D.4 – BU - Part 4: Exam I Overview - demonstrations and scoring of the Fundamentals Exam
                  NV D.5 – BU - Part 5: Exam II Overview - demonstrations and scoring of the Skills Exam
                  NV D.6 – BU - Part 6: Submittal and Wrap Up - applying for a BU diploma online
                  NV D.7 – Pool Fundamentals - The Stance - from Vol-I of the BU instructional DVD series
normal video
                  NV D.8 – Stun Shot Drill - from Vol-II of the Billiard University instructional DVD series
                  NV D.9 – How to Aim Pool Shots - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
                  NV D.10 – Draw Shot Trisect Aiming System - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
                  NV D.11 – Cue Ball Control Target Pool Drill - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
                  NV D.12 – Safety Drill - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series
                  NV D.13 – Kick Shot Aiming Systems - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series
                  NV D.14 – Pool Break Technique Advice - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series

                  TP 3.4 – Margin of error based on distance and cut angle
technical proof   TP 3.6 – Effective target sizes for slow shots into a corner pocket at different angles
                  TP B.15 – Pocket geometry calculations

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
               with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
               the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),”
and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                            November, 2013
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/billiard_university_bu_part_ix_kicks.pdf
title: Billiard University BU Part Ix Kicks
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Billiard University (BU) – Part IX: Kicks”                                ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at: dr-dave-
billiards.com.

     This is the ninth in a series of articles dealing with the Billiard University (BU). The mission of the BU is to
provide assessment tools, a rating system, and learning resources to help pool players strive for and achieve
excellence, and to officially acknowledge excellence through the awarding of diplomas (Bachelors, Masters, or
Doctorate of Pool). Canadian instructor Randy Russell and I cofounded the BU with support from the following
“dream team” of well-known and respected instructors: Jerry Briesath, Mark Finkelstein, Randy Goettlicher, Bob
Jewett, Mike Page, Tom Simpson, and Mark Wilson. Online videos NV D.1-D.6 explain every step of the BU
process and demonstrate the BU playing-ability exams, which are available for free on the BU website:
BilliardUniversity.org. NV D.7-D.14 include excerpts from the 3-DVD BU Instructional Series that provides
advice for improving your fundamentals, teaches useful aiming systems for various types of shots, and offers “hot
tips” for how to do well on the exams. This month we’ll cover the kick shot drill (S6) from the Skills Exam (Exam
II) along with some basic kick-shot aiming systems that you might find useful.

     Diagram 1 shows the setup for Drill S6 in the Doctorate level of Exam II. There are 7 shots total. The first
four are one-rail kicks at each of the four object balls (OBs). You get a point for each successful kick, and you get
only a single attempt at each ball. With the first four shots, the cue ball (CB) is in the same fixed position, a
diamond off each rail. You get “ball in hand” for the remaining shots. For a kick to be legal and count, a ball must
hit a cushion after CB-OB contact, unless the OB is pocketed which is also okay. A scratch is not allowed.

                                         Diagram 1 S6 – Kick Shot Drill

    Experienced players aim kick shots by “feel” using their experience-based intuition. Luckily, for the mere
mortals among us for whom kick-shot aiming does not come “naturally,” there are some effective and easy-to-use
aiming systems that can help. For a slow-speed, rolling-CB shot, you can use the through-diamond, equal-
distance system illustrated in Diagram 2. To use this system, move your tip along a line through the diamonds on
the kicking rail, with the cue over the CB, until the tip is halfway between the OB and the projected CB position.
As demonstrated in NV D.13, you can use your spare-hand finger at the midpoint to help visualize and check the
equal distances. Once you have your line of aim, just use slow to medium speed with a rolling CB (with no
Billiards Digest                                                                                            April, 2014
sidespin) and you’ll get an accurate hit on the OB. Notice how the CB actually contacts the cushion in front of the
midpoint. This is necessary because the CB curves forward slightly after rebound, making it go a little longer than
the angle of approach. Aiming with the tip along the diamonds accounts for this effect. For more info, see NV
B.81.

                       Diagram 2 Rolling-CB, through-diamond, equal-distance system

    In some game situations, a kick shot will require faster speed. For example, you might want to create
separation between the CB and OB after the hit, maybe as part of a safety play. Diagram 3 shows how the
equal-distance system is modified to aim fast-speed kicks. Instead of placing the tip along the diamond line, it is
placed along the rail “groove” or “gutter.” The “groove” is the imaginary line in front of the rail where balls sit when
frozen to the cushion. On an old and worn cloth, the rail-groove line is usually visible on the cloth due to wear.
As with the previous system, make sure the CB is rolling with no sidespin. Here, the fast speed limits and delays
the curve of the CB forward after rebound causing it to go shorter, closer to the true equal-angle direction. With
either approach, if the distances aren’t equal when you first line up the cue, adjust the angle as necessary. While
adjusting, keep the cue over the CB while moving the tip along the diamond or rail-groove line until the distances
are the same. Again, NV D.13 demonstrates how the systems are applied at the table.

Billiards Digest                                                                                              April, 2014
                           Diagram 3 Fast-speed, rail-groove, equal-distance system

     The fourth and fifth shots in the drill require you to kick off two rails at the 1 and 3 balls. Diagram 4 illustrates
an aiming system you can use for shots like these. It is called the midpoint-parallel-shift aiming system. Start by
aiming the cue at the center of the corner pocket through the midpoint between the CB and OB. Then parallel-
shift the cue until it is over the CB. Then make a small aiming adjustment toward the pocket since the CB will
typically go longer than predicted by a true parallel shift. The amount you need to shift will depend on table
conditions, shot speed, the amount of english, and the angle of the shot. (FYI, details concerning how to apply
this method effectively in different situations can be found on Disc IV of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots”
(VEPS).) As with most multi-rail kick-shot aiming systems, use running english with a rolling CB for the best
consistency. Again, NV D.13 demonstrates the aiming system along with how to apply it to the shots in the drill.

                         Diagram 4 Two-rail kick midpoint parallel-shift aiming system

    The seventh and last shot of the drill requires you to kick off any three rails at the 2 ball, with ball in hand. A
useful system for aiming this sort of shot is the Corner-5 System. This system was explained in detail in my
November ‘10 through January ‘11 articles, which are available at billiards.colostate.edu. It is also
demonstrated, with many examples, in NV B.85. NV D.13 explains how the system is applied to the last shot in
the BU Exam II drill.

     You should try different options for the two- and three-rail kicks to determine which might be more reliable and
consistent for you. If you haven’t taken the BU playing-ability and rating exams yet, give them a try. They provide
a fun, challenging, and efficient pool workout to help you develop and improve the full range of pool skills
necessary to be a good player. Everything you need to prepare for and take the exams is available for free at
BilliardUniversity.org. It’s time to see where you rank so you can set a goal to graduate your game to the next
level.

Good luck with your game,
Dean Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                                                April, 2014
                 NV B.81 – Bank and kick shot terminology and basics, from VEPS IV
                 NV B.85 – Corner-Five System for aiming three-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
                 NV D.1 – BU - Part 1: Introduction - overview of the BU process for earning a pool diploma
                 NV D.2 – BU - Part 2: Table Setup - preparing to practice and take the BU exams
                 NV D.3 – BU - Part 3: Video Recording - recording official exam runs for online submittal
                 NV D.4 – BU - Part 4: Exam I Overview - demonstrations and scoring of the Fundamentals Exam
                 NV D.5 – BU - Part 5: Exam II Overview - demonstrations and scoring of the Skills Exam
                 NV D.6 – BU - Part 6: Submittal and Wrap Up - applying for a BU diploma online
normal video
                 NV D.7 – Pool Fundamentals - The Stance - from Vol-I of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.8 – Stun Shot Drill - from Vol-II of the Billiard University instructional DVD series
                 NV D.9 – How to Aim Pool Shots - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.10 – Draw Shot Trisect Aiming System - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.11 – Cue Ball Control Target Pool Drill - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.12 – Safety Drill - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.13 – Kick Shot Aiming Systems - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.14 – Pool Break Technique Advice - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series

PS:
      •        If you are a pool instructor and are interested in becoming involved with the BU, check out the “Instructor
               How-To Guide” in the instructor section at BilliardUniversity.org.
      •        Every July, we hold a BU Summer School Boot Camp in Colorado. If you want to raise your game to the
               next level, consider attending. Details are available at BilliardUniversity.org. I hope to see you there.
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
               with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
               the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),”
and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                                 April, 2014
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/billiard_university_bu_part_v_stun_shots.pdf
title: Billiard University BU Part V Stun Shots
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Billiard University (BU) – Part V: Stun Shots”                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at: dr-dave-
billiards.com.

    This is the fifth in a series of articles dealing with the Billiard University (BU). The mission of the BU is to
provide assessment tools, a rating system, and learning resources to help pool players strive for and achieve
excellence, and to officially acknowledge excellence through the awarding of diplomas (Bachelors, Masters, or
Doctorate of Pool). The BU was cofounded by me and Randy Russell, with support from the following “dream
team” of well-known and respected instructors and instructional authors: Jerry Briesath, Mark Finkelstein, Randy
Goettlicher, Bob Jewett, Mike Page, Tom Simpson, and Mark Wilson. Online videos NV D.1-D.6 explain every
step of the BU process and demonstrate the BU playing-ability exams, which are available for free on the BU
website: BilliardUniversity.org. NV D.7-D.14 include excerpts from the 3-DVD BU Instructional series that
provides advice for improving your fundamentals, teaches useful aiming systems for various types of shots, and
offers “hot tips” for how to do well on the exams. In the last few months, we’ve looked at the BU exams and how
to determine your player and table ratings. Over the next few months, I’ll cover some “hot tips” and useful advice
from the BU instructional DVD series. This month’s topic is the stun-shot drill from Exam I.

     Diagram 1 illustrates drill F5 from the BU Fundamentals Exam (Exam I), which deals with stun and speed
control. The goal is to pocket the object ball (OB) and have the cue ball (CB) take a direct path to and end up
within or overlapping the rectangular target in its current position. The target is an 8.5x11” sheet of paper with the
center cut out leaving a 1” border. Like other drills in Exam I, this drill is progressive, meaning the difficulty level
increases with each shot success. Unlike with the other progressive-practice drills in Exam I, where the CB
moves to increase shot difficulty, here the target is moved instead (to the next higher position after each success
and the next lower position after each miss). For the first shot, the target is in position 4 up against the end
cushion and turned sideways. In all of the other positions, the target is aligned with the long axis of the table.
Positions 5, 6, and 7 require that you rebound the CB off the end cushion first. You can place the CB wherever
you want for each shot. As with the other progressive-practice drills, you get ten shots, and your score for the drill
is the target position after the last shot plus any bonus points earned during the drill for successes at target
position 7.

                                          Diagram 1 F5 – Stun-shot drill

Billiards Digest                                                                                         December, 2013
     This drill can be challenging because you need to aim accurately, be able to create near perfect stun, and
have good speed control. First of all, you need to aim the shot carefully because if you don’t pocket the OB the
shot counts as miss. But even if you pocket the OB in the center of the pocket, several things can go wrong, as
illustrated in Diagram 2. If your speed is off, you can come up short of the target (see the red path) or go long
(see the blue path). Also, if the CB doesn’t have stun (i.e., sliding with no topspin or bottom spin) when it reaches
the OB, the CB won’t head down the tangent line to the target center. If the CB has slight topspin instead, it can
follow forward of the target (see the purple path); and if the CB has slight backspin, it can draw back from the
target (see the orange path).

                                            Diagram 2 Possible errors

    To help ensure the CB has stun when it reaches the OB, make sure you keep your elbow as still as possible
during the stroke into the CB and keep your grip relaxed so the tip will hit the CB where you are aiming. Also, it is
easier to control CB stun if you place the CB fairly close to the OB. Remember, you have ball in hand for this drill.
With the CB close, you can use a near center-ball hit, which is easy to visualize. NV D.8 offers additional advice
and hot tips for improving your performance both on the drill and with shots in game situations where you need to
send the CB in the tangent-line direction with controlled speed. Watch the video the next time you’re online.

    Diagram 3 illustrates some other important effects. If you cheat the pocket by accident, the tangent-line
direction will no longer head straight up table (see the red path). This might cause the CB to go wide of the
target, especially for the higher-number target positions, where the CB rebounds off the cushion. Also, with any
cut shot, the CB picks up a little sidespin from the collision with the OB. This is called cut-induced spin (CIS). For
detailed info and demonstrations of CIS and other spin-transfer effects, see the “spin transfer” page in the FAQ
section in my website. For the cut to the right in Diagram 3, the CB picks up a little left (or clockwise) spin. On a
slow and “sticky” cloth, the spin wears off fairly quickly as the CB travels to the end rail, and the rebound off the
cushion might be true (with no angle change due to spin). But if you play on fast and slick cloth, some spin will be
retained on the way to the cushion, especially with the faster speeds required for target positions 6 and 7. In this
case, instead of going in the natural rebound direction, the left spin will cause the CB to rebound to the left of the
natural direction. One approach to dealing with CIS is to cheat the pocket to the right a little, or allow the CB to
develop a touch of topspin so it goes forward slightly (see the blue path). The induced left spin will change the
rebound angle and bring the CB back to the target off the end cushion. Another option is to use a touch of inside
english, in this case slight right spin, to counteract the effect of the CIS. In this case the CB won’t have any net
sidespin off the OB and will rebound true (see the black path). You will need to experiment to find out what works
best for you with the equipment on which you are playing.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        December, 2013
                                               Diagram 3 Other effects

    For more information and demonstrations, see online videos NV D.4 and D.8. They show example run-
throughs of the drill, explain how to score, and provide a lot more advice and hot tips for success.

    If you haven’t taken the BU playing-ability and rating exams yet, give them a try. Everything you need to
prepare for and take the exams is available for free on the BU website (BilliardUniversity.org). It’s time to see
where you rank so you can set a goal to graduate your game to the next level.

     I am happy to announce that I have now been a BD columnist for 10 years. That’s 120 articles! This might
not seem like a lot in comparison to the number of articles written by George Fels, Mike Shamos, and Bob Jewett,
but I consider it a good start. I can’t believe I’ve written so many already. I’ve always kept a file with a list of
ideas for future articles. When I started in January of 2004, I had about 40 ideas for articles. Currently, I have
about 70 ideas in the file, and it keeps growing. Every time I finish one article, I seem to think of 3 others I want to
write. I hope you continue to look forward to my column for many years to come. I plan to stay around for as long
as I am welcome.

Good luck with your game,
Dean Dave

               NV D.1 – BU - Part 1: Introduction - overview of the BU process for earning a pool diploma
               NV D.2 – BU - Part 2: Table Setup - preparing to practice and take the BU exams
               NV D.3 – BU - Part 3: Video Recording - recording official exam runs for online submittal
               NV D.4 – BU - Part 4: Exam I Overview - demonstrations and scoring of the Fundamentals Exam
               NV D.5 – BU - Part 5: Exam II Overview - demonstrations and scoring of the Skills Exam
               NV D.6 – BU - Part 6: Submittal and Wrap Up - applying for a BU diploma online
               NV D.7 – Pool Fundamentals - The Stance - from Vol-I of the BU instructional DVD series
normal video
               NV D.8 – Stun Shot Drill - from Vol-II of the Billiard University instructional DVD series
               NV D.9 – How to Aim Pool Shots - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
               NV D.10 – Draw Shot Trisect Aiming System - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
               NV D.11 – Cue Ball Control Target Pool Drill - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
               NV D.12 – Safety Drill - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series
               NV D.13 – Kick Shot Aiming Systems - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series
               NV D.14 – Pool Break Technique Advice - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series

Billiards Digest                                                                                         December, 2013
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
          with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
          the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),”
and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       December, 2013
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/billiard_university_bu_part_vi_9_ball_drills.pdf
title: Billiard University BU Part Vi 9 Ball Drills
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Billiard University (BU) – Part VI: 9-Ball Drills”                        ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at: dr-dave-
billiards.com.

     This is the sixth in a series of articles dealing with the Billiard University (BU). The mission of the BU is to
provide assessment tools, a rating system, and learning resources to help pool players strive for and achieve
excellence, and to officially acknowledge excellence through the awarding of diplomas (Bachelors, Masters, or
Doctorate of Pool). Canadian instructor Randy Russell and I cofounded the BU with support from the following
“dream team” of well-known and respected instructors: Jerry Briesath, Mark Finkelstein, Randy Goettlicher, Bob
Jewett, Mike Page, Tom Simpson, and Mark Wilson. Online videos NV D.1-D.6 explain every step of the BU
process and demonstrate the BU playing-ability exams, which are available for free on the BU website:
BilliardUniversity.org. NV D.7-D.14 include excerpts from the 3-DVD BU Instructional Series that provides
advice for improving your fundamentals, teaches useful aiming systems for various types of shots, and offers “hot
tips” for how to do well on the exams. In the last few months, we’ve looked at some drills from the Fundamentals
Exam (Exam I). Over the next few months, we’ll look at some drills from the Skills Exam (Exam II).

     Drill S3 in Exam II tests and helps you practice various common run-out patterns in 9-ball. There are three
different ball layouts in each of the three versions of the exam (Bachelors, Masters, and Doctorate). Suggested
run-out patterns and options for each of the layouts are demonstrated and discussed on Disc III of the 3-DVD BU
Instructional Series. Here, let’s look at the three layouts in the Doctorate version of the exam. Before looking at
the run-out patterns we suggest, first look at the ball layouts and decide which position plays you would choose to
maximize your chances for running out.

    Diagram 1 shows the first Doctorate-level 9-ball ball layout, along with the suggested run-out pattern. The
pattern we show is fairly straightforward and obvious; although, as with all patterns, depending on whether or not
you get out of line during the run out, you might need to alter the approach you take.

                                         Diagram 1 S3 – 9-ball layout 1

    Diagram 2 shows the second Doctorate-level 9-ball ball layout, along with the suggested run-out pattern. As
with most run-out patterns, it is very important to leave proper angles on each shot to make it easy to get good
Billiards Digest                                                                                         January, 2014
position for the next shot. All of the shots shown in the diagram are simple natural-roll or draw shots. No sidespin
is required to stay in line.

                                           Diagram 2 S3 – 9-ball layout 2

     Diagram 3 shows the third Doctorate-level 9-ball ball layout, along with the suggested run-out pattern. With
this layout, there is an added requirement that you must use 3-rail position to get on the 7 and 9 off the 6-ball and
8-ball shots. These are standard 9-ball shots that you must master if you want to be good at the game.
Remember the 45̊ rule? If not, see NV B.74. To get good position on the 6-ball shot, It is helpful to plan for a
stop shot on the 5 to leave a natural 3-rail path from the 6 to the 7. An outside-english stun shot will send the CB
safely around the 8 through the middle of the table. Then it helps to come off the 7 into the line for a similar shot
off the 8 to the 9. A rolling CB with slight outside english is a good approach for this shot.

                                           Diagram 3 S3 – 9-ball layout 3

     The next time you find time to practice (and not just play), try all nine of the 9-ball layouts in the three versions
of the Skills Exam (Exam II). Attempt each pattern as many times as it takes to run the table. Also experiment

Billiards Digest                                                                                             January, 2014
with different position-play options to see what works best for you, especially when you get out of line and need to
use “Plan B.”

     If you haven’t taken the BU playing-ability and rating exams yet, give them a try. They provide a fun,
challenging, and efficient pool workout to help you develop and improve the full range of pool skills necessary to
be a good player. Everything you need to prepare for and take the exams is available for free at
BilliardUniversity.org. It’s time to see where you rank so you can set a goal to graduate your game to the next
level.

Good luck with your game,
Dean Dave

                 NV D.1 – BU - Part 1: Introduction - overview of the BU process for earning a pool diploma
                 NV D.2 – BU - Part 2: Table Setup - preparing to practice and take the BU exams
                 NV D.3 – BU - Part 3: Video Recording - recording official exam runs for online submittal
                 NV D.4 – BU - Part 4: Exam I Overview - demonstrations and scoring of the Fundamentals Exam
                 NV D.5 – BU - Part 5: Exam II Overview - demonstrations and scoring of the Skills Exam
                 NV D.6 – BU - Part 6: Submittal and Wrap Up - applying for a BU diploma online
                 NV D.7 – Pool Fundamentals - The Stance - from Vol-I of the BU instructional DVD series
normal video     NV D.8 – Stun Shot Drill - from Vol-II of the Billiard University instructional DVD series
                 NV D.9 – How to Aim Pool Shots - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.10 – Draw Shot Trisect Aiming System - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.11 – Cue Ball Control Target Pool Drill - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.12 – Safety Drill - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.13 – Kick Shot Aiming Systems - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.14 – Pool Break Technique Advice - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV B.74 – Center-of-table position and routes, with the 45-degree rule, from VEPS II

PS:
      •        If you are a pool instructor and are interested in becoming involved with the BU, check out the “Instructor
               How-To Guide” in the instructor section at BilliardUniversity.org.
      •        Every July, we hold a BU Summer School Boot Camp in Colorado. If you want to raise your game to the
               next level, consider attending. Details are available at BilliardUniversity.org. I hope to see you there.
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
               with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
               the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),”
and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                              January, 2014
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/billiard_university_bu_part_vii_8_ball_drills.pdf
title: Billiard University BU Part Vii 8 Ball Drills
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Billiard University (BU) – Part VII: 8-Ball Drills”                         ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at: dr-dave-
billiards.com.

     This is the seventh in a series of articles dealing with the Billiard University (BU). The mission of the BU is to
provide assessment tools, a rating system, and learning resources to help pool players strive for and achieve
excellence, and to officially acknowledge excellence through the awarding of diplomas (Bachelors, Masters, or
Doctorate of Pool). Canadian instructor Randy Russell and I cofounded the BU with support from the following
“dream team” of well-known and respected instructors: Jerry Briesath, Mark Finkelstein, Randy Goettlicher, Bob
Jewett, Mike Page, Tom Simpson, and Mark Wilson. Online videos NV D.1-D.6 explain every step of the BU
process and demonstrate the BU playing-ability exams, which are available for free on the BU website:
BilliardUniversity.org. NV D.7-D.14 include excerpts from the 3-DVD BU Instructional Series that provides
advice for improving your fundamentals, teaches useful aiming systems for various types of shots, and offers “hot
tips” for how to do well on the exams. Last month, we looked at some 9-ball run-out-pattern drills from the Skills
Exam (Exam II). This month, we’ll do the same for 8-ball.

     Drill S4 in Exam II tests and helps you practice various common run-out patterns in 8-ball. There are three
different ball layouts in each of the three versions of the exam (Bachelors, Masters, and Doctorate). Suggested
run-out patterns and options for each of the layouts are demonstrated and discussed on Disc III of the 3-DVD BU
Instructional Series. Here, let’s study the three layouts in the Doctorate version of the exam. Before looking at
the run-out patterns we suggest, first look at the ball layouts and decide which position plays you would choose to
maximize your chances for running out.

     Diagram 1 shows the first Doctorate-level 8-ball layout along with the suggested run-out pattern. Starting
with ball in hand, the goal is to run-out the stripes. Per 8-ball rules, the stripes can be pocketed in any order;
although, in the diagrams, I’ve numbered the balls in the order in which they are pocketed to make it is easier to
see the recommended run-out pattern. As is common in typical games of 8-ball, there are often many run-out-
pattern options. With the ball layout in Diagram 1, we recommend clearing the balls in the center of the table first
because they can be problematic later in a run. The 15 is a good key ball for the 8 since it is easy to get a shot on
the 8 from almost any angle on the 15-ball shot. Notice how, as with any good run-out pattern, a proper angle is
left on each shot to make it easy to get good position for the next shot.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          February, 2014
                                         Diagram 1 S4 – 8-ball layout 1

    Diagram 2 shows the second Doctorate-level 8-ball layout along with the suggested run-out pattern. The
grey balls in the diagram represent obstacle solids. The 10-ball shot is a good place to start because the balls
close to the 8 are not the best key balls in this layout. The obstacle solids can get in the way, especially if good
angles aren’t left on the ball before the key ball. Here, the 15 ball is a much better key ball because almost any
angle on this ball will allow for easy position on the 8. Sometimes the best key ball can be far from the 8. The
position play from the 15 to the 8 is a very natural and common route in both 9-ball and 8-ball. Position plays
through the center of the table like this are important to practice and recognize in game situations. Here, the path
takes the obstacle solids totally out of the picture, and there is a wide margin for error with speed to get a good
shot on the 8.

                                         Diagram 2 S4 – 8-ball layout 2

    Diagram 3 shows the third Doctorate-level 8-ball layout along with the suggested run-out pattern. The
additional obstacle balls make this layout challenging. Be sure to think through your entire run-out pattern first,
before you commit to the first shot. Here, we recommend starting with the balls closest to the 8 since they can
present problems later due to the surrounding obstacle solids. A slight draw shot on the12-ball in the side is ideal
Billiards Digest                                                                                       February, 2014
to create a natural angle on the 13 to end up between the 14 and 15 on the end rail. Leaving an angle on the 15
allows a natural tangent-line path, with slight draw, to the 8 through the heart of the gap between the obstacle
solids. Here, even though the 15 is the ball farthest from the 8, it is probably the best choice for the key ball,
assuming you use the 13 and 14 as key balls to get on the key ball.

                                            Diagram 3 S4 – 8-ball layout 3

     The next time you find time to practice (and not just play), try all nine of the 8-ball layouts in the three versions
of the Skills Exam (Exam II). Attempt each pattern as many times as it takes to run the table. Also experiment
with different run-out patterns and position-play options to see what works best for you, especially when you get
out of line and need to use “Plan B.” Again, all of the layouts and patterns are demonstrated and discussed in
detail on Disc III of the 3-DVD BU Instructional Series.

     If you haven’t taken the BU playing-ability and rating exams yet, give them a try. They provide a fun,
challenging, and efficient pool workout to help you develop and improve the full range of pool skills necessary to
be a good player. Everything you need to prepare for and take the exams is available for free at
BilliardUniversity.org. It’s time to see where you rank so you can set a goal to graduate your game to the next
level.

Good luck with your game,
Dean Dave

               NV D.1 – BU - Part 1: Introduction - overview of the BU process for earning a pool diploma
               NV D.2 – BU - Part 2: Table Setup - preparing to practice and take the BU exams
               NV D.3 – BU - Part 3: Video Recording - recording official exam runs for online submittal
               NV D.4 – BU - Part 4: Exam I Overview - demonstrations and scoring of the Fundamentals Exam
               NV D.5 – BU - Part 5: Exam II Overview - demonstrations and scoring of the Skills Exam
               NV D.6 – BU - Part 6: Submittal and Wrap Up - applying for a BU diploma online
               NV D.7 – Pool Fundamentals - The Stance - from Vol-I of the BU instructional DVD series
normal video
               NV D.8 – Stun Shot Drill - from Vol-II of the Billiard University instructional DVD series
               NV D.9 – How to Aim Pool Shots - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
               NV D.10 – Draw Shot Trisect Aiming System - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
               NV D.11 – Cue Ball Control Target Pool Drill - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
               NV D.12 – Safety Drill - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series
               NV D.13 – Kick Shot Aiming Systems - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series
               NV D.14 – Pool Break Technique Advice - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series

Billiards Digest                                                                                            February, 2014
PS:
      •   If you are a pool instructor and are interested in becoming involved with the BU, check out the “Instructor
          How-To Guide” in the instructor section at BilliardUniversity.org.
      •   Every July, we hold a BU Summer School Boot Camp in Colorado. If you want to raise your game to the
          next level, consider attending. Details are available at BilliardUniversity.org. I hope to see you there.
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
          with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
          the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),”
and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        February, 2014
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/billiard_university_bu_part_viii_safeties.pdf
title: Billiard University BU Part Viii Safeties
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Billiard University (BU) – Part VIII: Safeties”                             ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at: dr-dave-
billiards.com.

      This is the eighth in a series of articles dealing with the Billiard University (BU). The mission of the BU is to
provide assessment tools, a rating system, and learning resources to help pool players strive for and achieve
excellence, and to officially acknowledge excellence through the awarding of diplomas (Bachelors, Masters, or
Doctorate of Pool). Canadian instructor Randy Russell and I cofounded the BU with support from the following
“dream team” of well-known and respected instructors: Jerry Briesath, Mark Finkelstein, Randy Goettlicher, Bob
Jewett, Mike Page, Tom Simpson, and Mark Wilson. Online videos NV D.1-D.6 explain every step of the BU
process and demonstrate the BU playing-ability exams, which are available for free on the BU website:
BilliardUniversity.org. NV D.7-D.14 include excerpts from the 3-DVD BU Instructional Series that provides
advice for improving your fundamentals, teaches useful aiming systems for various types of shots, and offers “hot
tips” for how to do well on the exams. In the last two months, we looked at 8-ball and 9-ball run-out patterns for
drills S3 and S4 in the Skills Exam (Exam II). This month, we’ll cover the safety drill S5.

    Diagram 1 shows the setup for Drill S5 in the Masters level of Exam II. The goal is to hide the 1 ball from the
cue ball (CB) using the cluster of nine balls as blockers. You are allowed to contact the rack of balls, but all of
them must remain within or overlapping the rectangle target. A template for the target can be printed from the BU
website. You get two attempts from each CB position. There are five different CB positions in the Masters
version of the exam, for a total possible number of points of 10 (1 for each of the 2 shots at each of the 5
positions). There are fewer CB positions in the Bachelors version of the exam, and there are additional (and
more challenging) CB positions in the Doctorate version.

                                            Diagram 1 S5 – Safety Drill

   Diagram 2 shows the recommended shots for CB positions 1 and 2. The natural-english rolling-CB shot
shown for CB position 1 is definitely the most natural approach. The thin cut on the second shot, with a significant
amount of sidespin, might not be the most reliable for all people (especially those who don’t have much
experience using sidespin), but it is also fairly natural. FYI, all of the shots recommended in this article are

Billiards Digest                                                                                            March, 2014
demonstrated in Youtube video youtu.be/PRC-jFHQaf4, which a recent attempt of mine at the complete Exam II.
Check it out. I wasn’t perfect on the safeties, but I did fairly well.

                          Diagram 2 Recommended shots for CB positions 1 and 2

    Diagram 3 shows the recommended shots for CB positions 3 and 4. These are both natural-angle rolling-CB
shots. All you need to control and focus on is the shot speed, which is often the case with safety shots. The shot
from position 3 requires about a 1/4-ball hit to get the best angles and ball-speed proportions.

                          Diagram 3 Recommended shots for CB positions 3 and 4

    Diagram 4 shows the recommended shot for CB position 5. Here, you don’t want the CB to be rolling
completely, because if it were it would head in the 30º rule direction. Here, the CB must swing out wider than the
natural-angle direction to hide behind the ball cluster. An above-center hit is required, but not high enough to
create full CB roll. The cut is about a 1/2-ball hit. If you are not familiar with the 30º rule, see the 30º rule
resource page in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu. This is a very-important and easy-to-apply principle
of pool.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       March, 2014
                                     Diagram 4 Recommended shots for CB position 5

     You should try different options for each shot to determine which might be more reliable and consistent for
you. And if you are ready for an additional challenge, try the Doctorate-level CB positions. Online video NV D.12
demonstrates several options for each shot in each version of the exam. Try them all, and try to think of
alternative approaches. This will help you improve your safety skills along with the decision-making judgment
required in defensive game situations.

     If you haven’t taken the BU playing-ability and rating exams yet, give them a try. They provide a fun,
challenging, and efficient pool workout to help you develop and improve the full range of pool skills necessary to
be a good player. Everything you need to prepare for and take the exams is available for free at
BilliardUniversity.org. It’s time to see where you rank so you can set a goal to graduate your game to the next
level.

Good luck with your game,
Dean Dave

                 NV D.1 – BU - Part 1: Introduction - overview of the BU process for earning a pool diploma
                 NV D.2 – BU - Part 2: Table Setup - preparing to practice and take the BU exams
                 NV D.3 – BU - Part 3: Video Recording - recording official exam runs for online submittal
                 NV D.4 – BU - Part 4: Exam I Overview - demonstrations and scoring of the Fundamentals Exam
                 NV D.5 – BU - Part 5: Exam II Overview - demonstrations and scoring of the Skills Exam
                 NV D.6 – BU - Part 6: Submittal and Wrap Up - applying for a BU diploma online
                 NV D.7 – Pool Fundamentals - The Stance - from Vol-I of the BU instructional DVD series
normal video
                 NV D.8 – Stun Shot Drill - from Vol-II of the Billiard University instructional DVD series
                 NV D.9 – How to Aim Pool Shots - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.10 – Draw Shot Trisect Aiming System - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.11 – Cue Ball Control Target Pool Drill - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.12 – Safety Drill - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.13 – Kick Shot Aiming Systems - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.14 – Pool Break Technique Advice - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series

PS:
      •        If you are a pool instructor and are interested in becoming involved with the BU, check out the “Instructor
               How-To Guide” in the instructor section at BilliardUniversity.org.

Billiards Digest                                                                                               March, 2014
     •    Every July, we hold a BU Summer School Boot Camp in Colorado. If you want to raise your game to the
          next level, consider attending. Details are available at BilliardUniversity.org. I hope to see you there.
     •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
          with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
          the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),”
and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          March, 2014
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/billiard_university_bu_part_x_the_break_shot.pdf
title: Billiard University BU Part X The Break Shot
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Billiard University (BU) – Part X: The Break Shot”                          ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at: dr-dave-
billiards.com.

     This is the tenth and final article in a series dealing with the Billiard University (BU). The mission of the BU is
to provide assessment tools, a rating system, and learning resources to help pool players strive for and achieve
excellence, and to officially acknowledge excellence through the awarding of diplomas (Bachelors, Masters, or
Doctorate of Pool). Canadian instructor Randy Russell and I cofounded the BU with support from the following
“dream team” of well-known and respected instructors: Jerry Briesath, Mark Finkelstein, Randy Goettlicher, Bob
Jewett, Mike Page, Tom Simpson, and Mark Wilson. Online videos NV D.1-D.6 explain every step of the BU
process and demonstrate the BU playing-ability exams, which are available for free on the BU website:
BilliardUniversity.org. NV D.7-D.14 include excerpts from the 3-DVD BU Instructional Series that provides
advice for improving your fundamentals, teaches useful aiming systems for various types of shots, and offers “hot
tips” for how to do well on the exams. This month we’ll cover what is probably the most important shot in pool: the
break shot.

   Diagram 1 shows the layout for drill S10 in BU Exam II. You break a 9-ball rack 3 times and get a point for
each of the following:
     • not scratching
     • keeping the cue ball (CB) from contacting a cushion
     • keeping the CB within the center 4x4-diamond target zone
     • pocketing 1 or more balls
     • sending 3 or more object balls above the head string and/or into pockets.

See online video NV D.5 for examples of scoring different breaks. This drill offers a good tool to assess and track
improvement in your break over time. Give it a try, and start keeping records.

    When you rack the balls, try to get them as tight as possible, with all of the balls touching. You are allowed to
break from anywhere you want behind the head string. If you are comfortable breaking with a normal bridge, near
the center of the head string is a good place for the CB. Breaking from the side, with a rail bridge, is another good
option. With a 9-ball rack, a side break offers the best chance of pocketing the 1-ball in the side and/or the near
side wing ball in the corner (see Diagram 1). Accuracy and consistency are very important with the break shot, so
use only as much power as you can control.

Billiards Digest                                                                                               May, 2014
                                       Diagram 1 Break shot drill layout

     Online video NV D.14 provides a summary of some of the helpful break-technique advice covered on Disc III
of the BU instructional DVD series. The most important goal for a power break is to achieve a square hit on the 1
ball (see Diagram 1). A square hit delivers as much energy as possible from the CB into the rack of balls. It also
limits the chances of hopping the CB off the table. To get a square hit, make sure you aim the break shot as
carefully as any other important shot.

     In addition to spreading the balls well with power, a secondary goal for the break is to control the CB and
“park” it in the center of the table (AKA “squat the rock”). To do this, the CB must have slight top spin when it
reaches the 1 ball. With a fast-speed break, to accomplish this you need to hit the CB slightly above center. The
weight of the rack of balls makes the CB bounce back naturally, and slight topspin is necessary to slow the CB to
a stop close to the center of the table. You will often see good breakers aim low on the CB at address, but the tip
will usually rise up during the stroke due to shoulder motion and elbow drop used to add power. The stills in
Diagram 2 illustrate this action.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          May, 2014
                                 Diagram 2 Squatting the rock with power

    One easy thing you can do to add more power to your break is to lengthen your bridge. A longer bridge
provides more distance to smoothly accelerate the cue to create more cue speed. Also make sure your follow
through is straight and complete (see Diagram 2c). This helps ensure tip contact point accuracy and fosters
complete acceleration in to the ball in an unconstrained way. Also make sure your bridge hand is planted firmly
Billiards Digest                                                                                      May, 2014
before and during the stroke into the ball to maintain accuracy and consistency. Another important element of
good technique is keeping the grip as relaxed as possible. A “death grip” will not add any power to the break. In
fact, it will do just the opposite by constraining and limiting full and smooth acceleration. It is okay to tighten the
grip as you approach the ball – this can help some people create a little more power – but make sure the grip is
relaxed to begin with.

    Diagram 3 shows some additional advice for adding power. Choking up on the grip is one thing that might
help (see Diagram 3a). Generally, during regular play, the forearm should be perpendicular to the cue at tip
contact, but moving the grip forward some can help put the shoulder and elbow into stronger positions during the
stroke into the ball.

      Coordinated motion of the elbow and shoulder can add significant power. When doing this, having a more
upright stance can help create a longer lever arm (see Diagram 3b) and make it easier to get the strong shoulder
muscles involved. You can raise your body before the stroke, after first aiming carefully in your normal position;
or you can raise your body during the stroke. Raising the body during the stroke can help some people generate
a little extra power. See NV D.14 for demonstrations and additional advice. Again, use only as much power as
you can control, and don’t use body lift, shoulder motion, or body lunge unless you have practiced these things
enough to master them.

                                    Diagram 3 Techniques for adding power

    For more break technique advice, along with links to other helpful video demonstrations, see the break
technique advice page in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu. And if you want to see how often pros
Billiards Digest                                                                                              May, 2014
make balls on the break and run out after the break, see the statistics section on the break resource page. Here’s
some example data from the 2013 US Open 9-ball Championship: The breaker made at least one ball (and did
not foul) 63% of the time, won 56% of the games, and broke and ran 21% of the games. Check out the resource
page for more info, and consider keeping records for yourself to see how you stack up against the pros and to
track your improvement over time.

     If you haven’t taken the BU playing-ability and rating exams yet, give them a try. They provide a fun,
challenging, and efficient pool workout to help you develop and improve the full range of pool skills necessary to
be a good player. Everything you need to prepare for and take the exams is available for free at
BilliardUniversity.org. It’s time to see where you rank so you can set a goal to graduate your game to the next
level. As Dean of the BU, I look forward to awarding you a pool diploma in the near future.

Good luck with your game,
Dean Dave

                 NV B.81 – Bank and kick shot terminology and basics, from VEPS IV
                 NV B.85 – Corner-Five System for aiming three-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
                 NV D.1 – BU - Part 1: Introduction - overview of the BU process for earning a pool diploma
                 NV D.2 – BU - Part 2: Table Setup - preparing to practice and take the BU exams
                 NV D.3 – BU - Part 3: Video Recording - recording official exam runs for online submittal
                 NV D.4 – BU - Part 4: Exam I Overview - demonstrations and scoring of the Fundamentals Exam
                 NV D.5 – BU - Part 5: Exam II Overview - demonstrations and scoring of the Skills Exam
                 NV D.6 – BU - Part 6: Submittal and Wrap Up - applying for a BU diploma online
normal video
                 NV D.7 – Pool Fundamentals - The Stance - from Vol-I of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.8 – Stun Shot Drill - from Vol-II of the Billiard University instructional DVD series
                 NV D.9 – How to Aim Pool Shots - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.10 – Draw Shot Trisect Aiming System - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.11 – CB Control Target Pool Drill - from Vol-II of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.12 – Safety Drill - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.13 – Kick Shot Aiming Systems - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series
                 NV D.14 – Pool Break Technique Advice - from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series

PS:
      •        If you are a pool instructor and are interested in becoming involved with the BU, check out the “Instructor
               How-To Guide” in the instructor section at BilliardUniversity.org.
      •        Every July, we hold a BU Summer School Boot Camp in Colorado. If you want to raise your game to the
               next level, consider attending. Details are available at BilliardUniversity.org. I hope to see you there.
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
               with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
               the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),”
and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                                 May, 2014
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/billiards_on_the_big_screen_pool_hall_junkies.pdf
title: Billiards on the Big Screen - Pool Hall Junkies
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                        ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Billiards on the Big Screen – Pool Hall Junkies”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV A.12) help you locate the resources on the
website. If you don’t have access to the Internet, or if you have a slow connection (e.g., a
modem), you may want to view the resources from a CD-ROM instead. To order one, send a
check or money order (payable to David Alciatore) for $21.45 (includes S&H) to: Pool Book CD;
626 S. Meldrum St.; Fort Collins, CO 80521. The CD-ROM is compatible with both PCs and
MACs.

      This is the final article in my “Billiards on the Big Screen” series, where I illustrate and
describe interesting shots from movies with major billiards themes. In my first two articles
(August and September, 2004), I presented some shots from the classic billiards films “The
Hustler” and “The Color of Money.” By the way, if you want to refer back to any of my previous
articles and online resources, you can access them at billiards.colostate.edu. This month’s
article deals with the most recent popular billiards movie: “Pool Hall Junkies.” Originally, I had
planned to do a fourth article on “Donald in Mathmagic Land,” an animated Disney short film with
a major billiards component, but I decided to skip it because all of the examples are from 3-
cushion billiards, which is not as popular as it once was. In fact, it can be difficult to even find a
“billiards” table (without pockets) anymore. Also, because the movie was released in 1959 and
because it was not a feature film, it may be difficult for many readers to find a copy to rent or
borrow. As a side note, if you are interested in learning how to aim multiple-rail kick shots (which
are ubiquitous in 3-cushion billiards), see my description of the Diamond System online at TP 7.2.
I present the standard numbering and formula system along with a revised method that I use.

                  TP 7.2 – Multiple-rail diamond-system formulas
technical proof

    “Pool Hall Junkies” (2002, Gold Circle Films) is the story of Johnny (played by Mars
Callahan), a pool hustler with a lot of talent, many unrealized dreams, and a wealthy girlfriend
named Tara (played by Alison Eastwood). His “mentor” Joe (played by Chazz Palminteri) has
misguided him and taken advantage of his ability since he was a teenager. To make a long story
short, Johnny breaks away from Joe, Joe gets Johnny’s younger brother, Danny (played by
Michael Rosenbaum), in trouble, and Johnny comes to the rescue in an exciting high-stakes
match against a very capable foe, Brad (played by Rick Shcroder), also mentored by Joe.

     Diagram 1 illustrates a shot executed by Johnny early in the movie. The shot is a partial
jump shot over the 3-ball and 9-ball. The gap between the 3-ball and 9-ball is not large enough
for the cue ball to pass through, but the cue ball can easily clear the gap with a small height jump
shot. You elevate the cue stick about 45º and strike through the center of the cue ball with a fast,
throwing motion. NV A.12 shows a demonstration of the shot. This shot is very similar to a shot
from the movie “The Color of Money” I presented in last month’s article (see NV A.11).
                2

                                               3

                                           9

                        the cue ball jumps
                        between and over                                      elevated cue
                       the 3-ball and 9-ball                                           fast
                                                                                       medium
                                                                                       slow

                                    Diagram 1 Partial jump shot

                NV A.12 – Partial jump shot
normal video
                NV A.11 – Partial jump, dead-on combination shot

     Diagram 2 illustrates a shot used by Johnny, and Tara’s uncle Mike (played by Christopher
Walken), to hustle Tara’s boss at a party. The cue ball is frozen to the 8-ball, and both balls are
frozen to the rail. The goal is to cut the 8-ball with just enough angle to have it stop in front of the
side pocket. In the meantime, the cue ball kicks off the opposite rail to pocket the 8-ball. Notice
the aiming line of the cue stick in the diagram. You aim toward the opposite side pocket to get
the resulting cue ball motion. You might need to experiment with the aiming line, ball placement,
and speed, depending upon your table conditions, but the shot is easier than it looks once it is set
up properly. NV A.13 shows a demonstration of the shot. This shot is reminiscent of the frozen
8-ball bank shot from the movie “The Hustler” (see NV A.2). In both cases, the shots are set-up
trick shots used to play a hustle. Both shots also occur in defining scenes of each movie.
Principle 6 summarizes a common theme with shots that actors execute in the movies. The
shots are usually either easy to execute because they are set-up shots with an easy stroke (e.g.,
the shot in Diagram 2), or there is a large margin for error (e.g., the shot in Diagram 5 presented
later in the article). Despite this, it is still very impressive that the actors take the time to learn and
make the shots, given how valuable their time is.
                                                  8     8

                                                                         fast
                                                                         medium
                                                                         slow

                      ideally, the 8-ball
                   comes to rest in front
                     of the side pocket,
                 so cue ball speed (timing)
                       is not as critical

                           Diagram 2 Frozen cue-ball carom-kick shot

                 NV A.13 – Frozen cue-ball carom-kick shot
normal video
                 NV A.2 – 8-ball bank hustle shot

Principle 6 Hollywood actor billiard shots

Shots made by actors (and not pro stand-ins) are usually easier than they look or have
wide margins for error.

•     An example is the shot in Diagram 2 from “Pool Hall Junkies” (see NV A.13), executed by
      both Christopher Walken and Mars Callahan (who executed the shot one-handed).
•     One exception to this rule is Mars Callahan, playing Johnny in “Pool Hall Junkies.” He is
      obviously a good pool player, and makes several difficult shots during the movie (without the
      use of a pro stand-in and fancy video editing).

     Diagram 3 illustrates a shot executed by Brad (Joe’s new hot talent) while sharking one of
Danny’s friends. Danny’s friend thinks he has a huge advantage because Brad is letting him take
four balls off the table after the break. Unfortunately, as Danny points out to his unsuspecting
friend, this is a classic hustle. Removing the balls only allows Brad to more easily run the table,
because there are fewer balls to get in his way. NV A.14 shows a demonstration of the shot.
There are two ways for the shot to work, as shown in the diagram. The 2-ball can hit the rail
twice (Diagram 3a) or just once (Diagram 3b), still deflecting off both the 7-ball and 5-ball into
the pocket. The producers of the film liked this shot so much, they replayed the exact same
footage later in the movie, when a sequence of shots is being shown. Look for this money-saving
video-editing trick when you watch the video.
                   the 2-ball            5 2
                                                              the 2-ball             5
                                                                                         2
                caroms off the                             caroms off the
               7-ball and 5-ball         7
                                             2            7-ball and 5-ball          7 2
               into the pocket,                  2          directly into                    2
                hitting the rail                             the pocket
                     twice
                        fast
                                                     OR           fast
                                    2                                          2
                        medium                                    medium
                        slow                                      slow

                  a) two rail contacts                         b) one rail contact

                                   Diagram 3 Double bank-carom shot

                    NV A.14 – Double bank-carom shot
normal video

      Diagrams 4 and 5 illustrate shots shown during the movie-ending match between Johnny and
Brad. For the shot in Diagram 4, the cue ball is in the jaws of the top corner pocket, frozen on
the near wall, so the direct path to the 2-ball is blocked. The only reasonable option to pocket the
2-ball is to kick the cue ball off the opposite wall or point of the pocket. As described in NV A.15,
it is easier to kick off the wall. To kick off the point, your aim must be perfect. Left English is
required when kicking off the pocket wall to have the cue ball rebound toward the 2-ball. Top-left
English is shown in the diagram because you must cue over the rail. You must also lift the stick a
little during the follow-through to prevent a double hit of the cue ball.
                       the cue ball is hooked by
                     the near point of the pocket,
                        but can be deflected off
                          the far wall or point
                             of the pocket
                                                        fast
                                                        medium
                                                        slow

                                                                  2

                        Diagram 4 Kick shot out of the jaws of a pocket

                NV A.15 – Kick shot out of the jaws of a pocket
normal video

     The shot shown in Diagram 5 is a rail-assist jump shot, where the cue ball is jumped off the
rail cushion, clearing the 2-ball and 3-ball, to hit the 1-ball and pocket the 9-ball. Several things
make this shot easier than it might look. First, the cue ball is close to the rail allowing you to jump
the cue ball off the edge of the rail cushion. Only a little cue ball height is required to get much
more height off the cushion. Second, there is a gap between the 2-ball and 3-ball. The gap is not
large enough for the cue ball to fit though; but as with the partial jump shot in Diagram 1, you
don’t need a large cue ball height to clear the balls. Finally, because the 1-ball is frozen to the 9-
ball, there is a very large margin for error. You can hit almost any part of the 1-ball, and the 9-ball
will be pocketed. NV A.16 shows a demonstration of the shot.
                                            the 1-ball frozen to        9
                                           the 9-ball creates a     1

                                          large margin for error

                         elevated cue
                                 fast
                                 medium
                                 slow

                                the cue ball jumps
                                off the rail cushion
                                over and between            3
                                                                2
                               the 2-ball and 3-ball

                               Diagram 5 Rail-assist jump shot

               NV A.16 – Rail-assist jump shot
normal video

I hope you have enjoyed my “Billiards on the Big Screen” series. Good luck with your game, and
practice hard,
Dr. Dave

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” (2004, Sterling
Publishing).
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/billiards_on_the_big_screen_the_color_of_money.pdf
title: Billiards on the Big Screen - The Color of Money
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                        ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Billiards on the Big Screen – The Color of Money”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV A.7) help you locate the resources on the
website. If you don’t have access to the Internet, or if you have a slow connection (e.g., a
modem), you may want to view the resources from a CD-ROM instead. To order one, send a
check or money order (payable to David Alciatore) for $21.45 (includes S&H) to: Pool Book CD;
626 S. Meldrum St.; Fort Collins, CO 80521. The CD-ROM is compatible with both PCs and
MACs.

     This is the second article in my “Billiards on the Big Screen” series, where I illustrate and
describe interesting shots from movies with major billiards themes. Last month, I presented some
shots from the classic billiards flick: “The Hustler.” By the way, if you want to refer back to any of
my previous articles and online resources, you can access them online at
billiards.colostate.edu. This month’s article deals with the huge box-office success: “The Color
of Money.” In my next two articles, I will show shots from “Pool Hall Junkies” and “Donald in
Mathmagic Land.”

    ”The Color of Money” (1986, Touchstone Pictures) is the story of two hustlers who teach
each other a few things about pool and life. Fast Eddie Felson (played by Paul Newman), a
seasoned hustler, discovers Vincent (played by Tom Cruise), an immature and young hustler with
great talent and potential. Fast Eddie convinces Vincent and Vincent’s girlfriend (Carmen, played
by Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio) to tour the country together to work hustles at local pool halls.
Vincent’s ego and showiness often get in the way of efficient hustling, and Fast Eddie’s and
Vincent’s relationship becomes strained. Fast Eddie becomes disenchanted with Vincent and
dedicates himself to regaining the skill he one had. The movie leads to a dramatic confrontation
between Fast Eddie and a more seasoned Vincent during a tournament at the end of the movie.
The story has interesting similarities with “The Hustler” (see last month’s article), but the role of
Eddie Felson is reversed (from young hustler to older manager). Although, Fast Eddie is a better,
kinder, and more lovable mentor figure than the manager (Bert) in the original film. Like “The
Hustler,” ”The Color of Money” did wonders for increasing the popularity of billiards. It also
helped create a more positive, almost glamorous, image of our great sport.

     Diagram 1 illustrates a shot Tom Cruise makes fairly early in the movie after a smart-ass
opponent plays what he thinks is a great safety shot during a game of 9-ball. The cue ball is
snookered behind the 8-ball, blocking a direct path to the 7-ball. “Luckily,” the 7-ball is frozen to
the 9-ball and lined up perfectly for an easy carom shot into the bottom-right corner pocket. The
two-rail kick shot shown in the diagram is a fairly easy shot to execute, and it allows an easy run-
out for a victory. The shot has a wide margin of error due to the frozen 9-ball. The cue ball can
hit the 7-ball anywhere on the near side (away from the target pocket) and the 7-ball will carom
off the 9-ball into the pocket. NV A.7 shows a demonstration of the shot. Diagram 1 shows one
possible final table layout for the cue ball and 9-ball that leads to an easy run-out. The final
layout in NV A.7 is different, but the run-out is still fairly easy.
                                                                            the 7-ball carom
                                                                             off the 9-ball is
                                                                             set up perfectly

                          fast
                          medium
                          slow

                                the cue ball                                            9
                                                                                            7
                               is snookered
                                                                   9
                      8
                             behind the 8-ball

               Diagram 1 Post-safety, dead-on, frozen-carom, two-rail kick shot

                NV A.7 – Post-safety, dead-on, frozen-carom, two-rail kick shot
normal video

      Diagram 2 is from the scene where Fast Eddie (Paul Neuman) is being sharked by another
hustler (Amos, played by Forest Whitaker) during his comeback. This is a setup (“trick”) shot with
the goal of pocketing both the 8-ball and 9-ball in the same corner pocket. As shown in the
diagram, the 8-ball is frozen to the 9-ball, which is also frozen to the rail. Note that the 8-ball-9-
ball impact line is not perpendicular to the rail. Because of this, an amateur player might think the
9-ball would bounce off the rail away from the target pocket. However, the cut angle on the 8-ball
creates a sideways friction force on the 9-ball that creates “throw” and imparts clockwise spin to
the 9-ball, both of which redirect the 9-ball’s rebound path up towards the target pocket. The
really tricky part of this shot is getting the 8-ball to rattle off both corner pocket points at just the
right angle to send it towards the same target pocket as the 9-ball. Unfortunately, after many
attempts by me, with many unfruitful minor adjustments, I was not able to execute the shot
successfully. Like many difficult setup shots like this, the exact placement of the balls is critical.
If things are not setup perfectly for your table and ball conditions, you will not be able to make the
shot, regardless of how much skill you have. Even with a perfect set-up, you still have to stroke
the shot perfectly. In NV A.8, I show some of my attempts to give you a feel for how it should
work, and I show how each ball should make its way to the target pocket individually. I hope this
shot does not cause you as much grief as it caused me if you decide to try it out. Good luck! I
also hope that the shot was at least a small challenge (and took numerous attempts) for the pro
“stand-in” that executed the shot for the actor in the movie.
                                                                                          8 9
               the 9-ball gets       the 8-ball rattles out of
               pocketed first,   the pocket and heads towards
               then the 8-ball        the far corner pocket

                                               fast                         the 8-ball
                                               medium                   induces left spin
                                               slow                       on the 9-ball,
                                                                      which kicks the 9-ball
                                                                         towards the far
                                                                          corner pocket

                         Diagram 2 Frozen-bank, corner-rattle artistic shot

                  NV A.8 – Frozen-bank, corner-rattle artistic shot
normal video

    The shots in Diagrams 3 and 4 are also from Fast Eddie’s comeback, when he is starting to
regain his confidence. In Diagram 3, the 8-ball is frozen to the cue ball, which is also frozen to
the rail. The goal of the shot is to pocket the 8-ball in the top-left corner pocket to win a game of
8-ball. The proper technique to execute this shot is to elevate the cue stick over the 8-ball and
use top-left English with the aiming line a little off the rail perpendicular (see NV A.9). The left
English causes the cue ball to rebound back towards the 8-ball after rail compression, which
helps cut and throw the 8-ball towards the target pocket. I will present throw, English transfer,
and frozen-ball effects in detail in future “Illustrated Principles” articles.
                                                                                      8

                                                                           the cue ball
                                                                          stops in place
                                                 elevated cue
                                                         fast
                                                         medium
                                                         slow

                            Diagram 3 Frozen kick off the rail shot

               NV A.9 – Frozen kick off the rail shot
normal video

     Diagram 4 shows a difficult table layout that Fast Eddie was faced with at the end of a game
of 9-ball. The 8-ball and 9-ball are both frozen to the end rail, so you need to be careful with your
cue ball position for the 8-ball shot. The shaded area in the diagram shows the most desirable
cue ball position for the 8-ball shot to allow for easy position on the game-winning 9-ball shot. In
this shot, the most reasonable method to reliably reach the desired area is to use a power draw
shot (see NV A.10). In a future article, I will discuss how to visualize a desired cue ball position
area and how to plan position-play based on the area shape.
                    7                                                                      9

                                            most desirable area for
                                               cue ball position
                                             for the 8-ball-9-ball
                                                    run-out
                           fast
                           medium
                           slow                                                            8

                   power draw

                           Diagram 4 Power-draw for run-out position

                NV A.10 – Power-draw for run-out position
normal video

     Diagram 5 shows a shot Vincent (Tom Cruise) was faced with during a 9-ball tournament late
in the movie. The 3-ball is the lowest numbered ball remaining, so it must be hit first.
Unfortunately, the 7-ball and 8-ball block the direct path to the 3-ball, and the 6-ball blocks a
reasonable 1-rail kick shot possibility. The best alternative is to use a jump shot. “Fortunately,”
not much cue ball height is required to clear the gap between the 7-ball and 8-ball. You only
need to jump over a portion of each ball. NV A.11 explains and shows how the shot is executed.
This shot is not that difficult, but it still seemed like the shot was executed by a pro “stand-in” in
the movie (based on the editing). As Principle 5 summarizes, “stand-ins” are often necessary
when the level of difficulty of a shot is above the skill level of the actor. I wish I had a pro “stand-
in” I could call on when I’m trying to demonstrate the really tough shots (e.g., the shot in Diagram
2 and NV A.8).
                           9
                               3
                                                                                  elevated cue
                                                                                               fast
                                                                                               medium
                the frozen 3-ball-9-ball                                                       slow
                  frozen combination
                       is dead-on

                                              the 6-ball                                   8
                                           blocks the 1-rail      6
                                                                                       7
                                           kick shot option            the cue ball
                                                                     jumps between
                                                               and over the 7-ball and 8-ball

                               Diagram 5 Partial jump, dead-on combination shot

                      NV A.11 – Partial jump, dead-on combination shot
normal video

Principle 5 Hollywood stand-ins

Difficult shots in the movies are usually executed by stand-in pros, a fact often veiled by
fancy editing and production.

•     Examples include NV A.6 from the movie “The Hustler” (see my previous article), and NV A.8
      from the movie “The Color of Money.”

                      NV A.6 – Massé-draw carom (billiard) shot
normal video

I hope you are enjoying my “Billiards on the Big Screen” series. Good luck with your game, and
practice hard,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        As with all instructional articles, I encourage you to try out and practice the illustrated
               shots. Understanding principles is important, but nothing beats practice for improving
               your game.
      •        I recently added some high-speed video clips to my book website at:
                                             billiards.colostate.edu

               Two clips (HSV A.23 and HSV A.24) show super-slow-motion footage of two shots (the
               frozen bank shot and the draw-masse shot) illustrated in my previous article for the
               movie “The Hustler.” By the way, if you like looking at super-slow-motion videos of pool
               shots, you might also enjoy my collection of non billiards clips posted at:
                                   high_speed_video.colostate.edu
            On that site, you can find everything from a cube of Jello bouncing off a countertop, to a
            pellet gun shooting through a shaken-up pop can, to a dog catching a done off her nose.
            I hope you enjoy them. My students always find them entertaining.

                   HSV A.23 – "The Hustler" frozen bank shot
high-speed video   HSV A.24 – "The Hustler" draw-massé shot

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” (2004, Sterling
Publishing).
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/billiards_on_the_big_screen_the_hustler.pdf
title: Billiards on the Big Screen - The Hustler
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Billiards on the Big Screen – The Hustler”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV A.2) help you locate the resources on the
website. If you don’t have access to the Internet, or if you have a slow connection (e.g., a
modem), you may want to view the resources from a CD-ROM instead. To order one,
send a check or money order (payable to David Alciatore) for $21.45 to Pool Book CD;
626 S. Meldrum St.; Fort Collins, CO 80521. The CD-ROM is compatible with both PCs
and MACs.

      I’ve decided to take a break from my normal technical principles articles and present a topic
for fun: “Billiards on the Big Screen.” One weekend, I got a wild hair and decided to watch every
movie I could find in rental stores and libraries that had a billiards theme or major references to
billiards. My list included:

         •     “Donald in Mathmagic Land,” 1959, Disney, with Donald Duck.

         •     “The Hustler,” 1961, 20th Century Fox, with Paul Newman, George C. Scott, Jackie
             Gleason, and Piper Laurie.

         •     “The Music Man,” 1962, Warner Brothers, with Robert Preston, Shirley Jones, and
             Buddy Hackett.

         •     “The Color of Money,” 1986, Touchstone Pictures, with Paul Newman, Tom Cruise,
             and Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio.

         •     “Pool Hall Junkies,” 2002, Gold Circle Films, with Mars Callahan, Chaz Palminteri,
             and Christopher Walken.

     At first, I wanted to copy, and post on my website, many clips from all of the movies for
readers to view and for me to discuss during a series of articles. However, this is illegal, due to
those silly copyright laws. Instead, I decided to present several of the more interesting shots with
illustrations and online video demonstrations. Some of the shots illustrate important principles (in
the spirit of my “Illustrated Principles” column), and some are downright illegal “trick” shots. But
all of them are interesting and fun to discuss and try. Maybe, after reading my articles, you will
also rent the movies and try the shots like I did.

     In this article, I will present some of the more interesting shots from the classic billiards flick:
“The Hustler.” In future articles, I will show shots from the other films listed above. One
exception is “The Music Man.” This movie doesn’t show any billiards shots; however, the theme
does involve billiards. This flick is a musical that tells the story of a traveling salesman (Professor
Harold Hill) that shows up in a small Midwest town (River City, Iowa) to try to convince the
townsfolk to let him equip and train a boys marching band. Despite the Professor’s scamming
intent, he ends up falling in love with the local librarian (Shirley Jones from “The Partridge
Family”) and inspires the town with a love of music. As to be expected from a musical from the
60’s, the film has a very happy ending. You might be asking yourself: Why in the heck is Dr.
Dave talking about this movie in BD? Well, I am because the way Professor Hill gains the town’s
confidence is by convincing them they have a real problem on their hands: The local billiards
hall, that has only 3-cushion billiards tables (with no pockets), has decided to install a pool
(pocket billiards) table. He convinces the town of the severity of this problem by singing a very

Billiards Digest                                                                           August, 2004
cute song called “Ya Got Trouble” ... the movie is a musical after all. Here are some excerpts
from the song:
                                                   ...
                                 Ya got 1,2,3,4,5,6 pockets in a table.
                  Pockets that mark the difference between a gentleman and a bum
                with a capital ‘B’ and that rhymes with ‘P’ and that stands for POOL
                                                   ...
                                      Trouble, oh we got trouble
                                        right here in River City
                with a capital ‘T’ and that rhymes with ‘P’ and that stands for POOL

The professor uses the song to convince the town that the only way to keep the youngsters
“moral after school” (i.e., away from the pool hall) is to form a marching band. The song lyrics are
representative of a common theme in many of the movies: Pool has a bad reputation and is
shunned by society. Fortunately, pool seems to have a better image in today’s society. Non-
billiards people finally realize that most pool players are not irresponsible, pool-sharking drunks,
and that pool requires significant skill and brain activity.

    ”The Hustler” is the story of “Fast” Eddie Felson (Paul Newman), a small-time, but talented,
pool hustler who joins up with ruthless, bankrolled manager Bert Gordon (George C. Scott). Bert
takes Eddie’s talent and girlfriend on the road to try to make some big bucks. Eddie faces the
legendary “Minnesota Fats” (Jackie Gleason) and many social issues during this journey. At first
glance, “The Hustler” seems like a terrible reflection on the world of billiards, highlighting
sharking, alcohol abuse, thugs breaking thumbs, and even suicide. However, the movie did
wonders for increasing the popularity of billiards. The movie “The Color of Money” had a similar
effect on our sport’s popularity, with a slightly more positive image, in 1986.

     Diagram 1 illustrates probably one of the most recognized billiards shots from all of the
movies. It appears early in ”The Hustler” when “Fast” Eddie and his partner use it to shark
onlookers in a small town bar. In the shot, the 8-ball is frozen to the side rail and the cue ball is
frozen to the 8-ball. The goal is to bank the 8-ball into the top-right corner pocket to win a game
of 8-ball. Paul Newman executed this shot in the movie twice. He also missed it once (on
purpose) to help setup the hustle. As shown in the diagram and in NV A.2, you hit the cue ball
with top-right English with a fairly firm stroke, allowing the cue stick to lift up during your stroke.
The cue stick must lift to avoid jamming the balls into the rail and to provide clearance for the 8-
ball after banking off the rail. The top English (follow) helps with this. The right English on the
cue ball transfers left English to the 8-ball which causes it to deflect left off the rail towards the
corner pocket. Only a small amount of right English is required. This shot is fun and relatively
easy to execute and is still popular with today’s trick shot artists. Look for it during showings of
the “Trick Shot Magic” tournaments that often air on ESPN.

Billiards Digest                                                                          August, 2004
                                               fast
                                               medium
                                               slow

                                        the cue ball
                                        is frozen to
                                         the 8-ball
                                         on the rail
                                                        8

                                 Diagram 1 8-ball bank hustle shot

                   NV A.2 – 8-ball bank hustle shot
normal video

   Diagram 2 shows a shot from “Fast” Eddie’s first match-up with “Minnesota Fats.” Paul
Newman says:

     “Well, you don’t leave much when you miss, do you ‘Fat Man?’”

Then Jackie Gleason rightfully responds:

     “That’s what the game is all about.”

Then Paul Newman executes the shot, pocketing the 2-ball in the side pocket. The only problem
with this shot is that it is illegal! The only way to make it is to follow though with the cue stick
enough to hit the 9-ball with the cue stick (which is illegal). The 9-ball then sends the 2-ball
straight to the pocket (see NV A.3). Fat chance the real “Minnesota Fats” would have allowed an
opponent to execute such a blatantly illegal shot against him in real life ... but that’s Hollywood for
you. Hitting the shot fast helps disguise the illegal hit because it is difficult to see at high speeds,
but the double hit is obvious based on how the balls react. If the shot were hit legally, with the
cue stick hitting only the cue ball, the 9-ball and 2-ball would remain undisturbed (see NV A.3).

Billiards Digest                                                                          August, 2004
                                           fast
                                           medium
                                           slow

                                                        1
                                                  9
                                            2              follow through
                                                        so the cue stick hits
                                                      the 9-ball into the 2-ball
                                                           (this is illegal)

               Diagram 2 Illegally pocketing a ball with cue stick follow-through

                   NV A.3 – Illegally pocketing a ball with cue stick follow-through
normal video

     Diagrams 3 and 4 illustrate two carom shots that “Fast” Eddie makes after loosing his temper
while sharking people in a bar. Unfortunately, his thug opponents did not take too kindly to his
sharking and end up breaking his thumbs at the end of the scene ... not one of the more pleasant
scenes in the movie. In Diagram 3, the 4-ball is frozen to the 9-ball and the line through their
centers goes straight to the bottom-right corner pocket. In the shot, the 3-ball is pocketed with
top-right English to send the cue ball off the end rail into the 4-ball. The top English (follow)
causes the cue ball path to curve away from the tangent line toward the end rail, and the right
English helps kick the cue ball off the end rail toward the 4-ball (see NV A.4). There is a large
margin of error for this shot because if the cue ball touches any part of the 4-ball, the 9-ball will be
pocketed. One interesting side note about this shot is that it is unnecessary. With the 4-ball
frozen to the 9-ball, there is no need to try to make the 9-ball on the 3-ball shot as shown.
Instead, the 3-ball could be pocketed with a slow, center-ball hit, leaving an easy shot on the 4-
ball-9-ball frozen combination (see NV A.4). However, this would be too boring for movie-viewing
audiences. The shot in Diagram 4 is another carom shot. The cue ball and 1-ball are lined up
perfectly so a straight shot caroms the 1-ball off the 2-ball straight into the 9-ball, sending it
straight to the side pocket for an easy 9-ball victory (see NV A.5). The shots in Diagrams 3 and 4
are great set-ups for a non-pool-expert actor to execute, because they look fairly impressive but
don’t require very much skill to execute ... perfect for Hollywood. Actually, the shot in Diagram 3
takes a little practice, and it must be setup carefully, but it’s not too bad.

Billiards Digest                                                                          August, 2004
                                                                        3

                                      fast
                                      medium               the right English
                                      slow                   lengthens the
                                                                rebound
                                                                               4
                                                                                   9

                                     the frozen 4-ball-9-ball
                                  combination is lined up perfectly

                     Diagram 3 Cue ball carom into a frozen-ball combination

                                                  fast
                                                  medium
                                                  slow

                                              1

                              2
                                  9          the 1-ball caroms
                                               off the 2-ball to
                                              pocket the 9-ball

                                  Diagram 4 Perfect set-up carom shot

                   NV A.4 – Cue ball carom into a frozen-ball combination
normal video
                   NV A.5 – Perfect set-up object ball carom shot

     Diagram 5 shows a shot near the end of the movie during “Fast” Eddie’s rematch with
“Minnesota Fats.” Here’s an example shot that the actors were not capable of executing. A pro
was hired as a consultant/stunt-double to pull this one off. It’s an extreme massé-draw shot
where the cue ball is hit with a highly elevated cue stick, bottom English, and a forceful down-
stroke. The cue ball caroms off the 1-ball, sending the 1-ball into the pocket, and then the cue
ball draws back to pocket the 8-ball (see NV A.6). This shot is very difficult to execute if you have

Billiards Digest                                                                        August, 2004
not practiced and developed skill with massé shots before. Where’s Mike Massey when you
need him? One word of caution: If you do try this shot and if you care about the table on which
you are experimenting, I recommend placing a spare piece of table cloth beneath the cue ball so
you won’t leave multiple permanent marks (or even tears) on the table’s cloth. If you don’t have a
spare piece a cloth lying around, you might be able to get one from a local table-retailer or
installer. You should always use a spare piece of cloth under the cue ball when practicing any
massé or jump shots, because these shots require cue stick elevation and downward strokes.
Not only will the spare piece of cloth protect the table, but it will also make the shots a little easier
to execute (while you are learning) because there is a greater thickness of cloth to compress
while the cue tip imparts English and speed to the cue ball. Note that, as with the shot in
Diagram 3, the shot in Diagram 5 is overkill. The run-out could be carried out much more easily
by cutting the 1-ball in with a soft non-massé hit, leaving good position for the 8-ball (see NV A.6).

                                             elevated cue
                                                     fast
                                                     medium
                                                     slow

                                   1
                                       8

                            Diagram 5 Massé-draw carom (billiard) shot

                   NV A.6 – Massé-draw carom (billiard) shot
normal video

    Many interesting shots in the movie are from games of Straight Pool. This is the game “Fast”
Eddie and “Minnesota Fats” play during their two match-ups. I didn’t include any examples
particular to the game of Straight Pool in this article; but several interesting break and carom
shots are executed in the movie.

I hope you enjoy my “Billiards on the Big Screen” series,
Dr. Dave

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards.”

Billiards Digest                                                                           August, 2004
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/bridge_length_effects.pdf
title: Bridge Length Effects
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Bridge Length Effects”                                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Do you know what bridge length you should use, and why? I recently answered this question in detail in
online YouTube video NV L.55. This column summarizes all the important points.

    As shown in Image 1, bridge length is the distance from the front of the cue ball (CB) to the bridge support.
Here, it is about 13 inches or 33 cm. The generally recommended bridge length range is from 8 to 12 inches.
8 inches is a good choice for beginners. And 12 inches is a better choice for intermediate players. Complete
novice players might prefer a very short bridge length at 6 inches or less. And an advanced player or pro might
prefer something much longer.

                                      Image 1 Bridge length definition

     An advantage of a short bridge is it minimizes aiming error and unintentional sidespin caused by a non-
straight stroke. As shown in Image 2, with a short bridge (left), the tip does not move very much, even with
large sideways motion of the back hand. With a longer bridge (right) and the same sideways motion of the back
hand, the aim and sidespin changes are much larger. If these sideways motions might occur during a stroke,
as with a novice player, a shorter bridge is much better to minimize the associated tip errors. Better players
can use a longer bridge effectively because they have a straight stroke. Another possible error is bridge motion
during the stroke. As shown in the video, using a shorter bridge also helps limit the effect this has on a shot.

Billiards Digest                                     1                                                  July, 2024
                                  Image 2 Shot error caused by stroke error

      As shown in Image 3, one advantage of a longer bridge is you can see more of the shaft in front of you to
make it easier to align with the desired shot aim. This is especially true with an open bridge. As shown on the
left, a closed bridge partially blocks your view of the shaft, especially with a short bridge. As shown on the right,
a long and open bridge gives the best visibility of the shaft to help with alignment.

                                 Image 3 Short/closed vs. long/open bridge

    Another accuracy factor related to bridge length is cue elevation. When the back of the cue is elevated,
shot accuracy suffers. If you have large fingers or use a closed bridge, it can be difficult to get the cue level,
especially with draw shots, if using a short bridge (see Image 4). As shown in the video, using an open bridge
instead can help you get the cue more level. And with a longer bridge, an open bridge can help you get the
cue even more level. In the video, I show how with a center-ball aim and good stroke mechanics, I can get an
accurate hit with a near level cue, even with the slight tip placement error. But with the back of the cue elevated
some, using the same off-center tip-placement error, swerve causes the CB to go way offline. Remember,
always keep the cue as level as possible, especially on long shots or thin cuts where accuracy is critical.

Billiards Digest                                       2                                                    July, 2024
                               Image 4 Cue elevation with short, closed bridge

     Generally, it is recommended to use a consistent bridge length, so your setup is the same for every shot.
Then, you can just vary the stroke length to create the desired shot speed. It is just like putting or chipping in
golf, where you bring the club back a short amount for a slow-speed shot, and a longer amount for a fast-speed
shot. If you accelerate smoothly the same way on every shot, the stroke length totally determines the shot
speed. This is a good way to create stroke speed accuracy and consistency.

    As I demonstrate in the video, I divide my stroke length into quarters to help judge shot speed. I use a ¼
stroke for slow-speed shots, a ½ stroke for medium speed shots, a ¾ stroke for fast speed shots, and a full
stroke for power shots. For slow-speed shots, you have the option to use a shorter bridge, but you won’t get
the benefit of having a consistent setup and seeing more of the shaft for easier alignment. Also, with a shorter
bridge, it is difficult to maintain stroke accuracy with fast-speed shots because the stroke will be short and
punchy, which is difficult to control.

     The main reason good players prefer a long bridge is it enables a smoothly accelerating stroke over different
stroke lengths to create a wide range of speeds with as little effort as possible. The longer bridge is especially
important for power shots. By smoothly accelerating over the entire bridge length, you can stay relaxed and
easily generate the CB speed required. Obviously, this works only in you can maintain a straight stroke over
the long bridge length. But this is not a problem for good players, especially the pros.

     Image 5 shows a good game-situation example related to bridge and stroke length. What would you do in
this 8-ball situation, shooting stripes against a good player, with the 8 hanging in front of the side pocket blocking
the path of the 13 to the corner? Decide on what you would do before reading on. The good option here is a
finesse safety (assuming you have this skill), attempting to lock the CB up between the 13 and cushion with a
thin hit on the 13. For shots like this, it can help to use a very short bridge length and make the stroke as short,
slow, and smooth as possible. As shown in the video, I spread my bridge fingers to get as close to the CB as
I can. This helps put you in the right frame of mind and forces you to keep the stroke very short. You don’t want
to jab or poke at the CB. It is best to ignore the CB and just deliver the cue with a slow, smooth, and short
motion. If you really bury the CB, you will block both 1 and 2-rail kicks, and the only reasonable option your
opponent will have is a difficult massé kick. Even against a good player, your chances to win will be good.

Billiards Digest                                        3                                                    July, 2024
                                          Image 5 Game-situation example

    As shown in the video, for a power break shot, where the shot speed is very fast, it helps to have a break
cue with a natural pivot length well matched to your preferred bridge length. See the “natural pivot length”
resource page at billiards.colostate.edu for more information and demonstrations related to this topic. By
bridging at the natural-pivot length, if your aim is true and your bridge is still during the stroke, even if the cue
goes off line during the stroke, you will still get an accurate hit. In other words, an unintentional pivot or swipe
during the stroke will cancel the resulting CB deflection. I know this might seem too good to be true, but it
works. See the video for convincing demonstrations.

     So what’s the best bridge length? Well, it depends on the person; but in general, 8-12 inches or 20-30 cm
is a good starting point. Here’s a quick summary of the advantages of using a longer bridge:

     •     It allows for smoother and longer acceleration to create speed with less effort, potentially allowing for a
           straighter stroke.

     •     It allows you to see more of the shaft in front of you to make it easier to align to the shot more accurately.

     •     It makes it easier to get the cue more level, which can increase accuracy.

     •     It allows accurate and consistent speed control by varying the stroke length.

The one disadvantage is:

     •     Any stroking errors due to back-hand or bridge motion are exaggerated.

Each individual needs to determine which bridge length is the best compromise for them to balance these
effects. Be sure to check out online video NV L.55, which demonstrates everything in the article. I hope you
find the video interesting and useful.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV L.55 – BRIDGE LENGTH Effects and Considerations
   normal video

Billiards Digest                                          4                                                     July, 2024
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
          with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
          to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                        5                                                   July, 2024
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/cb_control_everything_you_need_to_know.pdf
title: CB Control Everything You Need To Know
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“CB CONTROL … Everything You Need to Know”                                  ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Recently, I posted online video NV J.27 that demonstrates all important cue ball (CB) control principles,
effects, and skills, all in one place. Topics covered include stop/stun/follow/draw, 90˚ rule, 30˚ rule, 3-times-
the-angle system, tangent line, natural angle, good action draw, pocket cheating, cut-induced throw, sidespin
effects, speed effects, drag and spin conversion, and CB control drills. Next to pocketing a ball, controlling
the CB so you can also easily pocket the next ball is a critical skill in pool. Predicting CB direction is also
important for avoiding scratches, executing break-out shots, aiming carom shots, planning position play, and
avoiding obstacles.

     With a stun shot, where the CB has no top or back spin when it arrives at the object ball (OB), the CB
heads in the tangent-line direction, perpendicular to the OB direction (see Photo 1). This is called the 90˚
rule. As demonstrated in the video, an easy way to visualize the tangent line at the table is to use your cue.
If you orient the cue in the direction necessary to push the OB into the pocket (with the side of the cue), the
cue will point in the tangent-line direction. Shot speed has no effect on tangent line direction, assuming the
CB has stun at the OB. At slow speed, you must hit low on the CB, especially at larger distance from the OB.
The backspin wears off on the way to the OB, resulting in a stun shot. With more speed, you don’t need to hit
the CB as low, especially if the CB is close to the OB. At fast speed, a near center-ball hit creates stun. A
stun shot sends the CB down the tangent line regardless of the cut angle of the shot. With a small angle, the
CB doesn’t travel very far down the line. As the angle increases, the OB acquires less speed and the CB
retains more, but the CB still moves along the tangent line. Even with no cut angle, the CB stays on the
tangent line. It just doesn’t move since all its speed is transferred to the OB. That’s why it is called a stop
shot. As with all topics in this article, online video NV J.27 demonstrates everything.

                                       Photo 1 90˚ rule for a stun shot

    A straight shot with topspin follows forward. And with a thin cut, topspin has very little effect, and the CB
does not change direction very much. But over a wide range of cut shots in between, a rolling CB deflects by
a fairly consistent angle called the natural angle. This angle is very close to 30˚ (see Photo 2) and can be
easily visualized with a firm but relaxed peace sign. See the video for demonstrations. You point your first
finger through the center of the CB in the direction of travel, with the middle knuckle adjacent to the center of
Billiards Digest                                                                                     January, 2020
the OB. Your other finger will point in the direction of final CB travel. At very slow speed, the CB deflects
more than the natural angle because there is more friction between the balls at slower speed causing more of
the topspin to be lost. At a little faster speed, the CB retains more topspin and follows more forward.
However, as you increase the speed more, the CB persists longer along the tangent line before curving
forward. As demonstrated in the video, you can visualize the delay by shifting your peace sign down the
tangent line depending on conditions and based on how much speed you plan to use.

                            Photo 2 30˚ rule natural angle for rolling-CB shots

     The 30˚ rule peace sign applies over a wide range of shots between a ¾-ball hit and a ¼-ball hit. The
center of the range is a center-to-edge (CTE) ½-ball hit shown in Photo 3. In the YouTube video description,
there is a link to an angle template you can print and use to help calibrate your 30˚ peace sign. The 30˚ angle
is a good average value to use over the entire ¼-ball to ¾ ball-hit range. However, if you want to be more
accurate, when the shot is fairly full (close to a ¾-ball hit) or fairly thin (close to a ¼-ball hit), you need to
shrink your peace sign a little. And when the shot is close to the center of the range at a ½-ball hit, you need
to stretch your peace sign a little. A shot close to ½-ball hit is easy to recognize because your line of aim will
be close to the edge of the OB.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      January, 2020
                                           Photo 3 ½-ball hit CTE aim

     For a straight shot with backspin, the CB draws straight back. And with a thin hit, backspin has very little
effect, and the CB stays close to the tangent line. For all cut angles between 0˚ and 40˚, which is a fairly wide
range, the total angle the CB draws back with a “good action” draw shot is 3-times the cut angle (see Photo
4). To use this system, you first need to be able to hit “good action” draw consistently. Here is how it is
defined. For a ½-ball hit CTE shot, “good action” draw causes the CB to come back at a right angle or 90˚
relative to its original direction. The reason for this is that a ½-ball hit is a 30˚ cut angle, and 3-times 30 is 90.
As demonstrated in the video, you can use your cue to visualize the 3 angles at the table. First place the tip
at the ghost-ball position and point your cue at the pocket. Then visualize the cut angle of the shot by
imagining a line through the center of the CB. Focus on visualizing the angle as a piece of pie. Now
duplicate that pie angle on the other side, and then duplicate it once more for a total of three. You can also
measure the angles with your hand, moving the angle distance along an arc, with the center of the arc at the
ghost ball.

                              Photo 4 3-times-the angle system for draw shots

Billiards Digest                                                                                         January, 2020
     When using the 3-times-the-angle system, you need to be careful to account for any pocket cheat. If you
hit a shot a little full, 3-times the angle comes up much shorter. And if you hit the shot a little thin, the
predicted draw direction goes much longer. Make sure you spend time practicing “good action” draw. Then
you will be able to effectively use the 3-times-the-angle system to predict draw direction for a wide range of
shots. If you need help with draw shot technique, see the resource page linked in the YouTube video
description. Remember, the 3-times-the-angle system works for all cut angles up to about 40˚ (i.e., a ball-hit
fraction greater than about 3/8).

     Speed has a big effect on draw shots. If you hit the shot too softly, even with an extremely low tip
position, the backspin will wear off on the way to the OB. At fast speed, backspin is retained, but the CB
shifts down the tangent line more with more speed. The final draw angle is the same, but it is shifted.

     I hope the information in this article and online video NV J.27 help you get a better handle on CB control,
allowing you to better “keep whitey on a string.” Be sure to watch the video and practice the drills at the end
of the video. Only then can you really put the information to use effectively.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.27 – CUE BALL CONTROL … Everything You Need to Know
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     January, 2020
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/cb_control_subtleties.pdf
title: CB Control Subtleties
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“CB Control Subtleties”                                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     In online video NV J.25, I present the Top 10 Myths of Pool. Myth 3 (“Sidespin affects the path the cue
ball (CB) takes off the object ball (OB)”) has resulted in the most online discussion and debate, so I thought I
would do a follow-up video (NV J.26) and article. This material builds on last month’s article looking at
important CB control principles and effects demonstrated in online video NV J.27.

     Photo 1 from online video NV J.26 shows important CB control references along with the subtle path
differences described in this article. Note that the 2 ball and 7 ball are placed adjacent to the target side
pocket as “sentinels’ to limit how much the pocket can be cheated. A slow-rolling CB heads in the 30˚ rule
peace-sign natural-angle direction. With a stun shot, the CB heads perpendicular to OB motion in the 90˚ rule
tangent-line direction. And a “good-action” draw shot heads in the 3-times-the-angle (“3A”) direction.

                                 Photo 1 CB Control Reference Directions

    It is important to know the effect of speed on CB path with follow shots. With more speed, the CB goes
down the tangent line longer before curving forward to the final direction. Photo 2 shows this effect for a fast-
speed topspin shot. With draw, speed has a greater effect. If the speed is too slow, the backspin wears off
on the way to the OB resulting in less or no draw. And again, with faster speed, the CB heads down the
tangent line longer before curving to the final angle.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    February, 2020
                             Photo 2 30° rule speed shift down the tangent line

    With a stun shot, if you aim at the ideal ghost-ball position the tangent-line motion will be as expected, but
the OB will be thrown offline slightly due to cut-induced throw (CIT). If you don’t know what throw is, or if you
want to learn more about it, see the throw tutorial page at billiards.colostate.edu. As shown in Photo 3, to
be accurate with where the OB enters the pocket (or if you are playing a long shot into a tight pocket), you
can aim to overcut the OB slightly (see the yellow line) and the OB will be thrown into the heart of the pocket
(see the red line), but this will create a different tangent line direction (see the “non-CIT stun” path in Photo 1.
An alternative approach is to target the ideal ghost-ball position and use gearing outside spin to prevent
throw. As demonstrated in online video NV J.26, this will send the OB in the desired direction and send the
CB down the expected ideal tangent line.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       February, 2020
                            Photo 3 CIT aim correction with shifted tangent line

     If you use more outside spin than the gearing amount, you will throw the OB in the spin-induced throw
(SIT) direction (to the left in Photo 3). If shot calls for this much spin, you can get more accurate OB motion
by aiming the shot a little full, resulting in the “outside stun” path shown in Photo 1. Again, this results in a
different tangent-line direction. So with a stun shot, sidespin can cause slight changes in the directions the
OB and CB head after contact.

     With a rolling-CB shot, side spin can also change the CB trajectory. As shown by the “inside follow”
direction in Photo 1, inside spin shortens the CB path. As demonstrated in the video, with an elevated cue,
this effect can be exaggerated, but this can be difficult to control.

    With a “good action” draw shot, the CB heads in the 3-times-the-angle direction (see “3A” in Photo 1).
One way to get tighter draw is to elevate the cue. This produces what is called “quick draw” (see Photo 1). If
you remove the sentinel balls, you can cheat the pocket and get even tighter draw (see “max draw with cheat”
in Photo 1).

     Again, Photo 1 shows the full range of CB directions one can achieve with this shot using combinations
of sidespin, cue elevation, and pocket cheat. The myth question concerning whether or not sidespin affects
the path the cue ball takes off the object ball has a complex and subtle answer. The main purpose for
sidespin is to change the direction the CB heads once it hits a cushion; although, as shown by the “inside
follow,” “non-CIT stun,” and “outside stun” directions in Photo 1, sidespin can also have a small effect on CB
direction off the OB.

    I hope the information in my recent articles and online videos help you get a better handle on precise CB
control, allowing you to better “keep whitey on a string.” Be sure to watch the videos and practice the drills
demonstrated. Only then can you really put the information to use effectively.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                                    February, 2020
                    NV J.25 – Top 10 Pool and Billiard Myths Busted and Debunked
                    NV J.26 – Cue Ball Control Subtleties – Pool Myth Follow-up
normal video        NV J.27 – Cue Ball Control … Everything You Need to Know

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     February, 2020
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/chalk_testing_sequel.pdf
title: Chalk Testing Sequel
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Chalk Testing Sequel”                                                      ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference
numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

   In a previous online video (NV F.1) and in my July ’15 BD article, I documented the following set of
experiments that can be used to objectively test and compare different brands of chalk to determine:

     1.) the amount of cling/skid/kick caused by a chalk mark on the cue ball (CB).

     2.) the number of sidespin shots possible with a single application of chalk before miscuing.

     3.) the miscue limit for maximum sidespin.

     4.) and how long chalk marks persist on the CB after multiple shots.

     Since that video and article came out, I have gotten many requests to test additional chalk brands.
Results for all of the chalks I have tested to date can be found under “chalk comparison” in the FAQ section at
billiards.colostate.edu. So far, I have tested: Master, Master pre-flag, Lava, Blue Diamond, Kamui (0.98),
Silver Cup, Magic Chalk, Predator, Great White (mako blue), and OB. Another chalk people have asked me
to test recently is Taom (pronounced “Tay om”) chalk. In new online videos NV J.7 and NV J.8, I show
simplified testing procedures that anybody can easily do on their own, and I test Taom in comparison with the
other popular chalks shown in Diagram 1.

                                  Diagram 1 Image from Chalk Test Video

     The first test I performed was to see how many shots can be hit without chalking before a miscue results.
When I applied the Taom chalk, I noticed that it seems a little more powdery and less smooth than other
chalks I have tested; and it seems more difficult to get a uniform coating on the tip. Part of this could be due
to color because the light tan Taom does not obscure the dark tip color as easily as standard blue chalk does.
With Taom, there were 5 shots before a miscue on the first test and 6 shots before a miscue on the second. I
also tested the newer “version 2” of Taom. Both tests yielded 5 hits before a miscue. Watch online video NV
J.7 to see the details of the test.

    Then I performed a miscue limit test for Taom chalk. For this test, I hit many shots close to the expected
miscue limit, chalking the tip very carefully before each shot. I used an Elephant Practice ball, which includes
a black stripe and red circle to help you visualize the typical miscue limit and allow you to check the chalk
mark after each shot to verify the tip contact point. As expected, the chalk mark was on the red circle with the
best of the non-miscue shots. I also did the same test for version 2 of Taom and got similar results. With

Billiards Digest                                                                                     December, 2018
these tests, I could detect no meaningful difference in performance between the original and version 2 Taom
chalk.

    For comparison purposes, I did the same sets of tests with Master chalk. I got 7 shots before a miscue
on the first test and 6 shots on the second. The Master miscue limit test results were similar to the Taom
results. Although, the best hits with Master were slightly farther from center as compared to the best Taom
shots, with the Master chalk mark on the outer part of the red circle instead of the center of the red circle, but
the difference was very little.

     One marketing claim I have heard about Taom chalk is that it is less likely to cause cling, so I decided to
test this also. Cling, also known as skid or kick, is an excessive amount of throw (more than the normal
amount) caused by a chalk mark at the contact point between the CB and object ball. For more information
and demonstrations, see online video NV J.8 and “cling/skid/kick” in the FAQ section at
billiards.colostate.edu. Because Taom chalk seemed a little more difficult to apply to the tip, and it did not
seem to coat the tip as thickly, maybe the chalk is also less likely to stick to the CB. If this is the case, cling
might occur less frequently with Taom chalk. Unfortunately, due to its light color, it is very difficult to see how
long Taom chalk persists on the CB as I was able to check with other chalks in online video NV F.1.

      Before reading explanations of the following tests, it would be very helpful to view online video NV J.8
first. The video clearly describes and demonstrates every step of the process.

     To test for cling, I first hit the CB at an angle squarely into the 1st of two frozen balls, causing the 2nd ball
to throw off line. Even with perfectly clean ball surfaces, the 2nd ball throws off line. I first marked with a golf
tee on the rail the direction of typical throw. Then, with my finger, I added a chalk mark to the contact point
between the two frozen balls, to see how much throw increases with maximum cling. I also marked this
direction with a golf tee on the rail.

    Then I wanted to show that cling also occurs as a result of a chalk mark left on the CB by a normal shot.
First, I chalked the tip, making sure there is very good coverage, especially in the center. Then I hit a
medium-firm stop shot to create a natural chalk mark on the CB. Then I placed the CB frozen to another ball
with the natural chalk mark at the contact point between the balls. For all brands of chalk that I tested, this
resulted in the same amount of cling as in the previous test; although, Kamui did create a little more cling than
the others.

     Then I did a simple test to help determine how frequently a particular brand of chalk might lead to cling.
Just as before, I first chalked the tip and hit a stop shot. I was using an Aramith Red Measles CB, aiming the
tip at one of the red spots so I could easily locate the chalk mark later. Then I placed the CB with the chalk
mark facing up, and hit a 3-cushion shot to the corner with top-right spin. Then I did the cling test with the
original chalk mark at the frozen-ball contact point. I then repeated this procedure, increasing the number of
3-cushion shots to 2, 3, 4, and 5 before the cling tests. I measured the amount of throw on video, using an
on-screen scale indicating the percentage of maximum cling relative to the normal amount of throw (both
marked with golf tees earlier). Alternatively, you can have a friend look where the ball hits the cushion and
measure the distance with a ruler.

      Table 1 shows a summary of all of the cling-test results. Each number in the table is the percentage of
maximum cling created by a chalk mark after a given number of shots. I have marked with an asterisk values
that seemed a little unexpected or unusual. Obviously, we should expect some variability, partly because my
cling test shot speed was not perfectly the same for every shot. Also, the chalk marks on the CB can be a
little different every time, and the mark might wear off differently depending on how the CB slides and hits
cushions during the pre-test shots. I tried to be as consistent as possible with CB orientation, and pre-test
shot speeds and spins, but there is also variability here. On two of the tests, there was practically no cling
(see the two zeros in the table). In these two cases, the chalk mark was not really visible because it
somehow managed to wear off in during the pre-test shots. But in every other case, the chalk mark resulted
in cling, and many times close to the maximum amount, even after several shots (see the 70s, 80s, 90s, and
100 throughout the table).

Billiards Digest                                                                                       December, 2018
               Table 1 Percentage Cling Effect of a Chalk Mark After Different Numbers of Shots

                                   # of shots    Master   Magic   Taom    Kamui
                                        1         90       20*     80      100
                                        2         60*      90      80      40*
                                        3         80        0*     40      20*
                                        4         30       90*     50*      70
                                        5         20       40       0*     90*
                                                *: unexpected/unusual
     After all of the chalk testing I have done over the years, my conclusions have not changed:

    1.) If you chalk properly before each shot (like most good players do), it does not really matter which
chalk brand you use. They all have very similar miscue limits, so the amount of sidespin you can apply is
practically the same with all chalks. Now, if you want to go many shots without chalking, or if you do not chalk
properly, you might prefer one of the chalks that remains effective on the tip longer, as shown by the number-
of-shots-before-miscue tests.

    2.) Some chalks do tend to stick to the CB more than others, so cling/skid/kick could happen more
frequently with these chalks.

   3.) Regardless of the type of chalk used, if a chalk mark ends up at the contact point between the CB
and object ball, cling/skid/kick (in other words, a “bad hit”) will occur.

     Based on everything I have observed and learned, my advice is:

    a.) Do not worry so much about the chalk you use. If you are miscuing, it is probably because of you, not
the chalk.

    b.) Make sure you chalk carefully and properly before each shot. See the end of online video NV J.7 for
a useful chalking advice.

    c.) Clean chalk marks off the CB every chance you get (before each break and every time you have ball
in hand).

    Please consider using the simple tests in online videos NV J.7, and NV J.8 to test chalks on your own. It
is not that difficult, and it does not take very long. Objective testing is better than subjective conjecture or
hearsay, and it is much better than listening to marketing hype from people who sell chalk. The next time you
doubt the effectiveness of your chalk, or somebody claims their chalk is better than yours, just do the simple
tests demonstrated in this video to come up with an objective conclusion on your own.

     Since my recent chalk testing videos have come out, there has been much online discussion via
YouTube, Facebook, and the AZB online forum. Before closing, I wanted to mention a couple of topics that
came up.all collisions might help shake the chalk off the CB, especially with the less “sticky” chalks. So this is
something I will need to look at in any future chalk testing. Second, I have been known to be a little strong
with my advice to avoid sticky “cosmetic grade” chalks, and the companies who sell these expensive chalks
probably do not like my advice, but I think this is a big issue. If a player uses a chalk that sticks to the CB, it
can not only create problems for them … it can also create problems for their opponents with the increased
risk of cling/skid/kick "bad hits." Sticky chalks might be a good idea for a player who does not chalk regularly
or properly, but I think they are a bad idea for everybody else.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV F.1 – Pool Chalk Experiment - Does the brand really make a difference?
                   NV J.7 – Chalk Testing Follow-Up, Taom vs. Master, and How to Chalk Properly
normal video       NV J.8 – Pool/Billiards/Snooker Cling/Skid/Kick Examples and Chalk Comparison

Billiards Digest                                                                                    December, 2018
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                               December, 2018
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/christina_and_the_dangerous_duck_slalom.pdf
title: Christina And The Dangerous Duck Slalom
topics: uncategorized
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
[NO_EXTRACTED_TEXT]
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/coin_proposition_shots.pdf
title: Coin Proposition Shots
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Coin Proposition Shots”                                                        ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

    There are many fun things you can do with a coin and a pool table. I like fun things, and I hope you do
too, so let’s look at a few classic coin proposition shots.

     Let’s start with a shot most pool players have seen before. As illustrated in Diagram 1, place a coin (e.g.,
a US nickel) on top of a cushion with a drinking glass sitting on the rail. The obvious goal is to hop the coin
into the glass. The trick is to use the right speed to compress the cushion the right amount to flip the coin at
just the right height. Give it a try. It’s not very difficult once you get a feel for the speed required. HSV B.17
shows a super-slow-motion demonstration of the shot. Check it out to see how easily the cushion
compression launches the coin into the air.

                                                                 glass

                                                       coin
                                                                         rail
                                                              cushion

                          Diagram 1 Hop the coin off the cushion into the glass

    Now let’s look at another classic, in this case the carnival con game challenge to knock a quarter off an
object ball (OB). The carnie places a ball in the center of a circle or on a dollar bill and then balances a
quarter on top of the ball. As illustrated in Diagram 2, the goal is to hit the OB and have the quarter land
more than 2-3 inches from the starting position (e.g., off a dollar bill, or out of a circle). HSV B.48
demonstrates several approaches to accomplishing the goal. If you have convenient Internet access, check
out the online video. It’s more interesting to see the shots rather than read about them.

                                                                 coin

                                                           move the coin
                                                            2-3 inches

                                   Diagram 2 Knock the coin off the ball

     A typical “mark” will think the best approach is to hit the OB as hard as possible to somehow send the cue
ball (CB) into the coin. As demonstrated in the video, this approach doesn’t work … the coin usually falls
straight down. Physics can be cruel sometimes. One fairly reliable approach to moving the coin is to elevate
the cue and use fast speed to jump or hop the CB into OB. As demonstrated in the video, any above-equator
hit on the OB, makes the OB hop and launch the coin into the air well away from the ball. With a higher hit,
the CB can hit the quarter either before or after hitting the OB and really sending the coin flying.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      January, 2012
    Another approach is to use a follow shot with medium speed, hoping to hit the quarter after it falls to and
bounces off the table. Obviously, with this approach you need to hit the OB very straight and hope for a good
bounce of the quarter, but it works fine when hit well. A third approach is to use slow speed to have the
quarter ride the OB before sliding off, and hopefully bounce forward. With this approach, the speed needs to
be just right; but when it is, the quarter can be sent forward quite a bit. See HSV B.48 for several examples.

    Another approach, with the OB on the foot spot of a table and the CB on the head spot, is to hit the shot
very straight with firm speed to rebound the OB off the end rail to hit the quarter while it is bouncing. This can
be difficult to do consistently; but when your aim is true, this approach works dramatically well. A final
approach is to cheat and use a heavier CB (or a lighter OB). As demonstrated in HSV B.48, a heavier CB
retains forward speed after hitting the OB and continues into the falling quarter, sending it forward.

    Now don’t expect to be able to be successful with all of these options if you are propositioned with this
shot at a carnival. Carnies don’t like to give away those large stuffed animals, so there are likely to be some
“extra challenges” for you to overcome. For example, the cue the Carnie provides probably won’t have a
decent tip, so be sure to not stray from a center-ball hit. Also, the CB might not jump or hop very well on the
carnival “table.” And there probably won’t be a rail cushion off which you can bounce the OB back into the
bouncing coin. Finally, the CB might “conveniently” be a little lighter than the OB, making it impossible to
drive the CB into the coin, with or without follow. However, with typical pool equipment, all of the options
shown in HSV B.48 are reasonable, albeit some tougher than others. Give them a try.

     A final coin proposition shot is illustrated in Diagram 3. It’s called the “two balls and a coin” shot. A coin
is placed in the center of the table and your “mark” is asked to place his index fingers on each of the corner
pocket hangers. The claim is that both balls can be pocketed with a single shot from the foot spot, even with
the mark’s fingers on the balls. This “two ball” proposition is usually more effective with a male “mark;”
although, it can also work with a female. If you view the video demonstration on YouTube, you will see why
this is the case. A link to the video can be found in the “Online Video Collection” section on my website under
“miscellaneous” (see "two balls and a coin" trick shot). I don’t want to spoil the surprise by describing the
shot, so go online if you haven’t figured it out yet.

                                                                                          1

                                                    coin                       “mark” with
                                                                                one finger
                                                                               on each ball

                                      pocket both balls with one stroke

                                                                                          2

                                       Diagram 3 “Two balls” and a coin

                   HSV B.13 - Level cue follow shot hop over stacks of coins
                   HSV B.17 - Coin hop off the rail into a glass trick shot
high-speed video
                   HSV B.48 - "Hit quarter off ball" proposition/trick shot

Billiards Digest                                                                                      January, 2012
Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   Another interesting thing you can demonstrate with a coin is the fact that the CB hops on any follow
          shot, even with a near-level cue. This is due mostly to squirt (AKA “CB deflection”), which drives the
          CB down into the table with any above-center hit. For a demonstration, see HSV B.13. With a firm
          follow shot, the CB hops a lot higher than you might think. In fact, this effect can sometimes cause
          the CB to jump off the table if you hit a firm follow shot at an angle close to a rail, especially if the cue
          is elevated some.
      •   I want to thank Rod Kreuter at Penn State University for suggesting that I film the “knock the quarter
          off the ball” trick. Fellow columnists Bob Jewett and I worked on the video together when he was on
          a visit to Colorado, and it was fun. Thanks for the help Bob!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” and co-author of the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS)” and
“The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).”

Billiards Digest                                                                                          January, 2012
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/collision_of_billiard_balls_in_3d_with_spin_and_friction.pdf
title: Collision of Billiard Balls in 3D with Spin and Friction Charles S. Peskin
topics: collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
Collision of Billiard Balls in 3D with Spin and Friction
                                Charles S. Peskin
                               September 25, 2020

Abstract
The collision of billiard balls is influenced by their spin. This influence is a conse-
quence of friction that acts during the very brief time that the balls are in contact.
Here we use the Coulomb friction law, which is especially convenient because it
does not require knowledge of the area of contact. In center-of-mass coordinates,
we solve the general problem of the collision of identical billiard balls in 3D.
When sliding friction is the only dissipative mechanism, we are able to express
the outgoing state of the balls unambiguously in terms of their incoming state.
When there is additional dissipation associated with compression of the balls dur-
ing the collision, there is a one-parameter family of solutions depending on the
extent of this additional dissipation.

Formulation in Center-of-Mass Coordinates
We consider two identical billiard balls, denoted A and B, each with mass m,
radius r, and scalar moment of inertia αmr 2 , where α is a dimensionless constant
that depends on the radial mass distribution. The coefficient of sliding friction
between the two balls will be denoted µ.

At the moment of collision, the surfaces of the two balls are tangent to each other,
and the point of contact is the center of mass of the system, since the balls are
identical. We choose our frame of reference and our coordinate system within
that frame so that the center of mass of the system is fixed at the origin. We also
choose the x axis so that it goes through the centers of both balls at the moment of
collision, with the center of ball A at x = −r and the center of ball B at x = +r.
The common tangent plane to the spherical surfaces of the two balls at the point
of contact at the moment of collision is the plane x = 0.

Since the center of mass of the system is at rest and the balls are identical, the
velocity of ball B is minus the velocity of ball A, and this is true at all times,
before, during, and after the collision.

                                          1
We denote the velocity of ball A by U = (U, V, W ), and then the velocity of ball
B is −U. The angular velocities of the two balls are denoted ΩA = (ΩAx , ΩAy , ΩAz )
and ΩB = (ΩBx , ΩBy , ΩBz ).

Equations of Motion During the Collision
We envision the collision as taking place during a short time interval (0, τ ). This
time interval is so brief, and the balls are so nearly rigid, that the geometric ar-
rangement of the balls (two spherical balls that touch at the origin with their cen-
ters at ±r on the x axis) can be thought of as remaining constant during the col-
lision. The velocities and angular velocities of the two balls are changing rapidly,
however, during (0, τ ), and we shall derive differential equations that govern how
they change.

Let f (t) > 0, t ∈ (0, τ ) be the magnitude of the normal force of one ball on the
other during the collision. This force is applied at the point of contact (i.e., at the
origin) in the negative x direction to ball A and in the positive x direction to ball
B. Note that this force does not result in any torque about the center of either ball.

According to Coulomb’s law of sliding friction, the magnitude of the frictional
force of either ball on the other is µf (t). This force acts at the origin in a direction
that is tangent to the plane x = 0. To find the specific dirction within this plane
in which the frictional force acts, we need to evaluate the relative velocity of the
material surfaces of the two spherical balls at the point of contact.

The velocity of a material point on the surface of ball B that happens to be at the
origin at any time during the collision is given by

                             −U + ΩB × (−rex ) ,
                                                    
                                                                                (1)

where ex is a unit vector in the positive x direction, since (−rex ) is the vector
from the center of ball B to the origin. Similarly, the velocity of a material point
on the surface of ball A that happens to be at the origin at any time during the
collision is given by
                               U + ΩA × (rex ) .
                                                  
                                                                                 (2)
Subtracting (2) from (1) and projecting the result onto the plane x = 0 we get the
tangential velocity of the surface of ball B relative to that of the surface of ball A

                                           2
as follows:

              −2(0, V, W ) − r (Ω × ex ) = −(0, 2V + rΩz , 2W − rΩy ),            (3)

where we have made the definition

                                   Ω = ΩA + ΩB ,                                  (4)

and of course the components of Ω are Ωx , Ωy , Ωz .

It will be useful to rewrite the vector (3) in polar form. To do this, we let S > 0
and θ be implicitly defined by

                               2V + rΩz = S cos θ,                                (5)
                              2W − rΩy = S sin θ.                                 (6)

and then let the unit vector e be defined by

                                  e = (0, cos θ, sin θ)                           (7)

Then the relative velocity defined by (3) becomes −Se, in which S is the sliding
speed and −e is a unit vector in the direction of sliding of the surface of ball B
relative to that of ball A at the point of contact. Therefore, the frictional force of
ball B on ball A during the collision is µf (t)(−e). Combining this with the normal
force, we get the following equation of motion for U(t) during the collision:
                                dU
                            m       = −f (t)ex − µf (t)e.                         (8)
                                 dt
We shall see later that the unit vector e, and the angle θ on which it depends, are
constants of the motion, but for now we allow for the possibility that they depend
on time. The sliding speed S of one ball on the other is not constant, and its time
dependence will be determined below.

We now turn our attention to the changes in the angular velocities of the two balls
during the collision. The torque applied by ball B to ball A about the center of
ball A is
                              (+rex ) × (−eµf (t)),                            (9)
and the torque applied by ball A to ball B about the center of ball B is

                                (−rex ) × (+eµf (t)).                            (10)

                                           3
Note the important fact that these torques are equal (not opposite). The forces
have opposite sign, but this is canceled by the opposite sign of the two vectors
from the centers of the balls to the point of contact, where the forces are applied.

It may seem worrisome, if these torques do not cancel each other, how can angular
momentum be conserved? Note, however, that the total angular momentum of the
system involves not only the spin angular momenta of the two balls, but also their
orbital angular momenta with respect to the center of mass of the whole system.
A formula for the total angular momentum will be given later, and it will be left
to the reader to verify that the incoming angular momentum and the outgoing
angular momentum are equal.

From the two equal torque expressions (9) and (10) we get the equations of motion
for ΩA and ΩB :
                              A                  B
                       2 dΩ               2 dΩ
                 αmr              = αmr              = −µrf (t) (ex × e) .     (11)
                         dt                 dt
From equation (11), we can see that the following are all constants of the motion
during the collision:
                            ΩA − ΩB , ΩA         B
                                            x , Ωx .                         (12)

By adding the two forms of equation (11) and then dividing both sides by αmr 2 ,
we get
                          dΩ        2µf (t)
                               =−           (ex × e(t)) .                    (13)
                           dt        αmr
We now have equation (8) for dU/dt and (13) for dΩ/dt. Since ΩA − ΩB is a
constant of the motion during the collision, and since Ω = ΩA + ΩB by definition,
we can always solve for ΩA and ΩB separately if we know Ω.

                                             4
In components, equations (8) and (13) read as follows:
                              dU
                            m       = −f (t),                                   (14)
                              dt
                              dV
                           m        = −µf (t) cos θ,                            (15)
                              dt
                             dW
                           m        = −µf (t) sin θ,                            (16)
                              dt
                             dΩx
                                    = 0,                                        (17)
                              dt
                             dΩy      2µf (t)
                                    =         sin θ,                            (18)
                              dt       αmr
                             dΩz        2µf (t)
                                    = −         cos θ.                          (19)
                              dt         αmr

We can use these equations, together with equations (5-6), which implicitly define
S(t) and θ(t) to derive equations for dS/dt and dθ/dt. To do so, we differentiate
with respect to t in (5-6) to obtain
                   d                dV       dΩz
                      (S cos θ) = 2     +r
                   dt               dt       dt    
                                      µf (t)      1
                                = −2           1+     cos θ,                    (20)
                                        m         α
                    d               dW        dΩy
                      (S sin θ) = 2     −r
                   dt                dt      dt    
                                      µf (t)      1
                                = −2           1+     sin θ.                    (21)
                                        m         α

To obtain the last line of (20), we used equations (15) and (19), and to obtain
the last line of (21) we used equations (16) and (18). By writing out dtd (S cos θ)
and dtd (S sin θ) in the foregoing, we get a pair of equations that can be solved for
dS/dt and dθ/dt. The results are
                                                       
                            dS          µf (t)        1
                                 = −2            1+       ,                      (22)
                             dt           m           α
                             dθ
                                 = 0.                                            (23)
                             dt

                                         5
Outgoing State in Terms of the Incoming State
With θ constant, it is straightforward to integrate equations (14-19) over (0, τ )
with the following results:
                                                    1
                        U(τ ) − U(0) = −              P,                     (24)
                                                    m
                                                    µ
                        V (τ ) − V (0) =         − P cos θ,                  (25)
                                                    m
                                                    µ
                      W (τ ) − W (0) =           − P sin θ,                  (26)
                                                    m
                      Ωx (τ ) − Ωx (0) =         0,                          (27)
                                                  2µ
                      Ωy (τ ) − Ωy (0) =               P sin θ,              (28)
                                                 αmr
                                                     2µ
                      Ωz (τ ) − Ωz (0) =         −       P cos θ,            (29)
                                                    αmr
where                                 Z τ
                                P =            f (t) dt                      (30)
                                       0
The parameter P , with units of momentum, is called the impulse of the collision.
We shall see later to what extent P can be determined.

    Now recall that Ω = ΩA + ΩB and also that ΩA − ΩB is constant. Because of
these relationships, equations (27-29) imply

                    ΩA,B       A,B
                     x (τ ) − Ωx (0) = 0,                                    (31)
                                         µ
                    ΩA,B       A,B
                     y (τ ) − Ωy (0) =       P sin θ,                        (32)
                                       αmr
                                           µ
                    ΩA,B       A,B
                     z (τ ) − Ωz (0) = −      P cos θ,                       (33)
                                         αmr

    Equations (24-26) and (31-33) determine the outgoing state of the system in
terms of the incoming state provided that the two parameters θ and P are known.
In fact, the parameter θ is itself determined by the incoming state. To see this,
evaluate equations (5-6) at t = 0. This gives

                        2V (0) + rΩz (0) = S(0) cos θ,                       (34)
                       2W (0) − rΩy (0) = S(0) sin θ,                        (35)

                                           6
in which S(0) > 0. This uniquely defines S(0) and θ (except of course that one
can always add any multiple of 2π to θ) in terms of the incoming state of the
system. Note that we could alternatively have obtained an equation for θ in terms
of the outgoing state by evaluating equations (5-6) at t = τ . We leave it as an
exercise for the reader to show that the same result is obtained either way. The
proof of this requires the use of equation (22) to relate S(τ ) to S(0).

    Another good exercise for the reader is to verify that the incoming and outgo-
ing angular momenta are the same. During the collision, the angular momentum
of the whole system with respect to its center of mass is given by

  L = αmr 2 ΩA + αmr 2 ΩB + ((−rex ) × (mU)) + ((rex ) × (m(−U))) , (36)

and this vector should be the same at t = 0 as at t = τ .

Conservation of Energy
and Evaluation of the Impulse of the Collision
Because we are working in center-of-mass coordinates and the balls are identical,
their translational kinetic energies are the same as each other at all times, but their
rotational kinetic energies may be different. Thus, the kinetic energy of the whole
system is given by
            1       1              1
      EK = 2 mkUk2 + αmr 2 kΩA k2 + αmr 2 kΩB k2
            2       2              2
            1       1                   1
         = 2 mkUk + αmr kΩ + Ω k + αmr 2 kΩA − ΩB k2 . (37)
                 2       2   A     B 2
            2       4                   4
It is useful to express the kinetic energy in the second way because ΩA − ΩB is
a constant of the motion, so the term involving ΩA − ΩB does not change during
the collision. Also, we have already determined how the quantity Ω = ΩA + ΩB
varies during the collision, see equations (27-29).

The heat generated by the collision is given by

      H = EK (0) − EK (τ )
                                  1
           = m kU(0)k2 − kU(τ )k2 + αmr 2 kΩ(0)k2 − kΩ(τ )k2 . (38)
                                                            
                                   4

                                          7
From equations (24-29) we have the following:
                                           2
           2           2             P      P
         U (τ ) = U (0) − 2U(0) +              ,                                 (39)
                                     m      m
                                                           2   
             2            2        µP cos θ              P
           V (τ ) = V (0) − 2V (0)          + µ2              cos2 θ,            (40)
                                     m                   m
                                                         2
                                          µP sin θ        P
          W 2 (τ ) =        2
                        W (0) − 2W (0)             +µ 2
                                                               sin2 θ,           (41)
                                            m             m
           Ω2x (τ ) =   Ω2x (0),                                                 (42)
                                                          2
                                         µP sin θ   4µ2 P
           Ω2y (τ ) =     2
                        Ωy (0) + 4Ωy (0)          + 2 2          sin2 θ,         (43)
                                           αmr      α r     m
                                                           2
                                         µP cos θ    4µ2 P
           Ω2z (τ ) =    2
                        Ωz (0) − 4Ωz (0)           + 2 2         cos2 θ.         (44)
                                           αmr      α r     m
Substituting these results into equation (38) for H, we get
                        H=      2U(0)P
                              + µ (2V (0) + rΩz (0)) P cos θ
                              + µ (2W (0) − rΩy (0)) P sin θ
                                                2
                                       2      1       P
                              −   1+µ 1+                 .                       (45)
                                              α       m
This can be written more succinctly in terms of S(0) by making use of equations
(34-35) together with the identity that cos2 θ + sin2 θ = 1. The result is
                                                             2
                                                    2       1     P
              H = (2U(0) + µS(0)) P − 1 + µ 1 +                            (46)
                                                            α     m
Note that H is the total amount of heat that is generated by the collision. The
amount of heat that is generated specifically by the sliding friction will be denoted
Hsfr and is given by                Z      τ
                              Hsfr =           µf (t)S(t) dt,                    (47)
                                       0
since µf (t) is the magnitude of the frictional force, and S(t) is the speed with
which the surface of one ball is sliding over the surface of the other at the point of
contact. To evaluate Hsfr , we use equation (22) for dS/dt, from which we obtain
                                                 Z t
                                     2µ         1
                    S(t) = S(0) −         1+           f (t′ ) dt′ .             (48)
                                      m        α     0

                                               8
Substution of this formula for the relative sliding speed S(t) into equation (47)
yields the following formula for Hsfr :
                       Z τ                          Z τ       Z t
                                       2µ2
                                           
                                                  1
      Hsfr = µS(0)         f (t) dt −       1+           f (t)       f (t′ ) dt′ dt
                        0               m        α    0          0
                                                τ           t             2 !
                            2µ2
                                                     
                                        1 1         d
                                              Z          Z
             = µS(0)P −            1+                         f (t′ ) dt′        dt
                             m          α 2 0 dt          0

                                      1 P2
                                       
                              2
             = µS(0)P − µ 1 +                .                                      (49)
                                      α m
Combining this with (46) we get the simple result that

                                                      P2
                            H − Hsfr = 2U(0)P −          .                         (50)
                                                      m
Note that all of the terms involving the friction coefficient µ have cancelled out.

Now we consider two different cases. In the first case, we assume that the only
dissipative mechanism is sliding friction. Then H = Hsfr and (50) becomes an
equation for P :
                                              P2
                                 0 = 2U(0)P −    .                           (51)
                                              m
The solution P = 0 would mean that there is no collision at all, so we reject this
and then the only possibility is

                                    P = 2mU(0).                                    (52)

This is the expected result for an elastic collision. What is interesting here is that
the result is unchanged by the presence of sliding friction, even though kinetic
energy is then not conserved. With P given by (52), we have completely deter-
mined the outgoing state of two billiard balls in terms of their incoming state, see
equations (24-35).

In the second case, we assume that there is also dissipation associated with the
mechanism that generates the normal force f (t), which physically comes from
the slight compression of the balls when they are in contact. Without specifying
that mechanism, the most we can say is that we have the inequality

                                      H > Hsfr ,                                   (53)

                                           9
since the total heat generated is now the sum of two positive terms, one of which
is Hsfr , and the other is the heat generated during the compression and expansion
of the two balls. Applying this inequality to equation (50) we get

                                                 P2
                                0 < 2U(0)P −        .                             (54)
                                                 m
Since P > 0, this is equivalent to

                                     P < 2mU(0).                                  (55)

On physical grounds, we also require mU(0) ≤ P . Otherwise the outgoing value
of U would have the same sign as the incoming value, see (24), and this would
mean that the two balls go through each other, which is clearly impossible. Thus,
we may conclude that
                            mU(0) ≤ P < 2mU(0).                              (56)
Within this range, we have a one-parameter family of possible outcomes. These
are the allowed values of P when there is dissipation associated with the com-
pression and expansion of the two balls during the collision. The borderline value
P = 2mU(0), which is not allowed by (56), is the value of P that was found
above for the case in which the only dissipative mechanism is sliding friction.

An important restriction on the foregoing analysis is that S(t) should not become
negative during the collision. Recall that dS/dt < 0, see equation (42), and if
S(t) = 0 at some time t ∈ (0, τ ) then the surfaces of the two balls are momentarily
at rest with respect to each other at that time, and a new phenomenon, namely
static friction, comes into play. This makes our analysis inapplicable beyond such
a time. Thus, we should impose the restriction that S(τ ) ≥ 0, and from (48) this
is equivalent to                                    
                                         2µ        1
                            0 ≤ S(0) −        1+        P.                     (57)
                                         m         α
This needs to be checked in any particular case to see whether the above results
are applicable or not. Since P is not part of the given data but is restricted by (56),
we can adopt a worst-case point of view and impose the condition
                                                 
                                     2µ         1
                        0 ≤ S(0) −         1+        2mU(0),                       (58)
                                      m         α
which implies (57) because of (56).

                                          10
Special Case of a Rolling Ball Striking a Ball at Rest
Here we consider the special case in which a billiard ball (A) that is rolling without
slipping on a table strikes another identical billiard ball (B) that is at rest on the
table. Let the plane of the table be z = −r so that when balls are on the table
their centers are in the plane z = 0. Let the ball that is initially at rest have its
center at the point (r, 0, 0) prior to the collision. The ball that is initially rolling
has the lab-frame velocity of its center of mass equal to (u, v, 0). The rolling ball
has been aimed in such a way that it will strike the other ball when the center of
the rolling ball is at (−r, 0, 0). Thus, the point of contact is the lab-frame origin.
Since the moving ball is rolling without slipping its angular velocity vector prior
to the collision is given by

                                 ΩA = (−v, u, 0)/r,                                (59)

and of course ΩB = 0 prior to the collision.

Now we change to center-of-mass coordinates with the two systems of coordinates
having their corresponding axes parallel, and also having origins that coincide at
the moment of collision. The incoming velocity of ball A in the center-of-mass
system is (u, v, 0)/2 and the incoming velocity of ball B in the center-of-mass
system is −(u, v, 0)/2. The angular velocities are the same in the center-of-mass
system as in the laboratory frame.

We consider the case in which the only dissipative mechanism is sliding friction,
so that
                            P = 2m(u/2) = mu.                                (60)
The parameters S(0) and θ are evaluated from equations (5-6) which in the present
case become

                                  v = S(0) cos θ                                   (61)
                                 −u = S(0) sin θ                                   (62)

Thus, S(0), which by definition is the speed with which the surface of one ball
is sliding over the other as the collision is initiated, turns out to be equal to the
lab-frame speed of the rolling ball. We denote this speed by s in the following, so
that                                        √
                              S(0) = s = u2 + v 2 .                              (63)

                                          11
Then
                                           v
                                   cos θ =                                        (64)
                                           s
                                           −u
                                   sin θ =                                        (65)
                                            s

We now have everything we need to evaluate the outgoing states of the two balls.
The center-of-mass outgoing velocity of ball A (which is minus the center-of-mass
outgoing velocity of ball B) is obtained from equations (24-26):
                                        u
                                U(τ ) =    − u,                                   (66)
                                        2
                                        v     uv
                               V (τ ) =   −µ ,                                    (67)
                                        2       s
                                            2
                                          u
                               W (τ ) = µ .                                       (68)
                                          s
To get the lab-frame outgoing velocities for ball A from these results, we simply
add the vector (u/2, v/2, 0). Thus, the lab-frame outgoing velocity of ball A is

                               (0, v − µuv/s, µu2/s)                              (69)

To get the outgoing velocity of ball B, we first change the sign of the results in (66-
68) to get the outgoing velocity of ball B in center-of-mass coordinates, and then
we add (u/2, v/2, 0) to convert to lab-frame coordinates. The outgoing velocity
of ball B in lab-frame coordinates is

                                (u, µuv/s, −µu2/s)                                (70)

Note that total linear momentum has been conserved, since it is equal to m(u, v, 0)
both before and after the collision. It is interesting that the outgoing velocities
include vertical components. The consequences of this will be discussed below.

We still need to evaluate the outgoing angular velocities of the two balls. Here,
there is no distinction between the lab frame and the center-of-mass frame. Also,
the change in angular velociy is the same for both balls, see equations (31-33).
In the present special case, these equations give the following change in angular
velocity:
                                      µu2 µuv
                                                
                                 0, −     ,−        .                        (71)
                                      αrs αrs

                                          12
Since the incoming angular velocity of ball B is zero, the vector (71) is equal to
its outgoing velocity. For ball A, however, we must add the change (71) to the
incoming angular velocity of ball A, which is (−v, u, 0)/r. Thus, the outgoing
angular velocity of ball A is
                                v u µu2 µuv
                                                 
                              − , −       ,−         .                       (72)
                                r r αrs αrs

Complications Associated with the Table
In the foregoing, we did not consider the influence of the table at all, except in
setting up the incoming conditions in which one of the balls is rolling without
slipping. There are three separate influences of the table that should be considered,
and we discuss them here.

The first question is whether friction with the table plays a role during the collision
itself. The table applies a normal force to either ball, and thus there is also a fric-
tional force whenever the contact point of a ball with the table is slipping. Prior to
the collision, the normal force on either ball is mg, so the frictional force, if any
slipping should occur, is µbt mg, where µbt is the coefficient of friction between
the ball and the table. Since the table is much softer than the ball, we assume that
the collision will be over before this force has time to change appreciably, and
therefore its consequences during the collision itself will be O(τ ) and therefore
neglibible in comparison to the impulse of the collision. Thus, we are need only
worry about the post-collisional influences of the table. This simplifies the matter
in two ways: First, it means that we can use the outgoing velocities and angular
velocities found above as initial conditions for the post-collision epoch; and sec-
ond, it means that we can consider separately the influence of the table on each of
the balls.

Recall that the outgoing velocities of both balls have a vertical component, with
ball A having upward velocity and ball B having downward velocity. This means
that ball B is immediately colliding with the table, and that ball A will leave the
table briefly and collide with the table on its way down. In either case, we have
the collision of a spinning ball with a table, and such a collision can be analyzed
in much the same manner as the collision between two balls. Since the table is
soft, it may be a realistic idealization to assume that the impulse of the collision
is as small as possible, so that no bounce occurs. In that case, ball B loses its

                                          13
vertical velocity immediately, and ball A loses its vertical velocity upon its first
return to the surface. These (inelastic) collisions with the surface also involve
changes in angular velocity and in the horizontal components of velocity that can
be calculated, but we omit the details.

Once the vertical velocity component has been eliminated, the situation for either
ball is that its center of mass is moving horizontally, and the ball has some angular
velocity as well. Unless the velocity and angular velocity are related in a very
particular way, there is slip between the ball and the table at their point of contact,
and by evaluating this slip and the associated frictional force we can obtain a
differential equation for the evolution of the velocity and angular velocity of the
ball. Note that both the velocity and the angular velocity are influenced by the
frictional force, and the overall effect after some finite (!) time is to bring the ball
into a state in which it is rolling without slipping.

The missing details of the foregoing are left, for now, as an exercise for the reader!

                                          14
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/collision_of_two_spinning_billiard_balls_and_the_role_of_table_friction.pdf
title: Collision of two spinning billiard balls and the role of table
topics: collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills, robotics_and_computation, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
Collision of two spinning billiard balls and the role of table

                                                                                               Hyeong-Chan Kim
                                                  School of Liberal Arts and Sciences, Korea National University of Transportation, Chungju 380-702, Korea

                                                                                                February 22, 2024
arXiv:2402.13258v1 [physics.pop-ph] 19 Jan 2024

                                                                                                      Abstract

                                                       We study the collision dynamics of a spinning cue ball approaching a static object ball with equal
                                                   mass on a plane, common in billiards. While typical collisions in billiards are nearly perfectly elastic, with
                                                   a restitution coefficient close to 1 and low friction, we explore three deviations from ideal elastic collisions:
                                                   The non-elastic nature, the friction effects between the balls during collision, the friction between the ball
                                                   and the table. We describe the detailed collision outcomes, emphasizing the importance of considering
                                                   frictions. We reveal that friction, both between the balls and with the table, significantly influences the
                                                   post-collision motions, deviating from the expectations of a purely elastic collision. The insights gained
                                                   contribute to a better understanding of ball dynamics, impacting strategies and gameplay in billiards.

                                                   1     Introduction
                                                   Billiard players claim that when a cue ball having topspin collides head on with an object ball, the cue ball
                                                   momentarily moves backward before advancing due to friction with the floor. Individuals familiar with the
                                                   perfectly elastic collision of two objects with equal mass find it difficult to intuitively accept this claim.
                                                   However, upon examining super-slow-motion videos, such as those on Dr. Dave’s YouTube channel [1], it
                                                   is confirmed that, immediately after the collision, the cue ball briefly lifts off the ground, moves slightly
                                                   backward, and then advances again due to rotation. In this way, collisions between two billiard balls
                                                   exhibit phenomena that deviate from intuitive expectations based on perfectly elastic collisions.
                                                       To understand these phenomena, a comprehend understanding of collision dynamics is necessary.
                                                   Theoretical studies on billiards have seen limited development since the early 1830s when Coriolis authored
                                                   a book on the mathematical theory of spin friction and collision in the game of billiards, translated into
                                                   English by Nadler [2]. Nearly a century later, Moore attempted the second physics analysis [3]. Subsequent
                                                   research has covered various aspects, including collisions between billiard balls [4, 5], collisions with
                                                   cushions [6], high-speed camera analyses [7, 8], and model studies for developing robotic systems for
                                                   billiards [9]. When using the cue to strike a billiard ball, the ball moves in a direction almost identical to
                                                   the cue’s striking direction. However, due to friction, the ball deviates slightly from the cue’s direction,

                                                                                                          1
       known as the squirt phenomenon [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. Although the angle is small, this deviation is a
       crucial factor that makes it challenging to hit a distant ball with the desired thickness in actual gameplay.
           The motion of a billiard ball is described by the translational motion of the center and the rotational
       motion around the center. When billiard players use the cue to strike the ball, the ultimate goal is to
       control the translational and rotational motion appropriately. Additionally, after the cue ball collides with
       the first object ball, the aim is to guide both balls’ trajectories according to the desired outcome. Precisely
       placing the cue ball at the intended position on the object ball requires extensive training. However, in
       practical games like 3-cushion or 4-cushion billiards, using the cue to send the cue ball to the object
       ball (assuming not aiming for a perfectly accurate thickness) is relatively straightforward, excluding the
       squirt/curve phenomenon. Therefore, during the game, the most critical element is understanding how
       the moving ball (cue ball) will behave after colliding with the stationary ball (object ball). This study
       aims to address this aspect.
           Firstly, two approximations that closely hold during the collision of two billiard balls are presented
       to assist in calculations. First, the friction between the balls during collision is considered negligible. The
       friction coefficient between billiard balls, denoted as µ, varies depending on the state and type of the balls
       but generally exists in the range of
                                                         0.03 ≤ µ ≤ 0.08.                                                 (1)

       Assuming no friction, angular momentum is not transferred between the colliding balls. Secondly, billiard
       balls undergo a perfectly elastic collision. The coefficient of restitution during the collision is approximately

                                                        0.92 ≤ e∗ ≤ 0.98.                                                 (2)

       A collision with a restitution coefficient of 1 is considered a perfectly elastic collision. Due to the coefficient

Figure 1: The perfectly elastic collision between two balls. The velocities of the two balls perpendicular to the collision plane
are exchanged. In this illustration, the collision plane is represented by the vertical line. After the collision, the two balls move
perpendicular to each other.

       of restitution being very close to 1, the collision between the balls closely resembles a perfectly elastic
       collision. For example, colliding a non-rotating cue ball head-on with a stationary object ball results in the

                                                                 2
cue ball to stop, and the object ball to move almost at the same speed as the cue ball before the collision.
Furthermore, colliding a non-rotating cue ball with a non-zero collision parameter with a stationary object
ball shows that the separation angle between them immediately after the collision is very close to 90o , as
depicted in Figure 1. Although the actual separation angle is slightly less than 90o due to the collision not
being perfectly elastic, it is typically around 85o ∼ 89o and does not significantly impact real games. It is
clear that the collision between balls is never perfectly elastic as sound and heat are generated during the
collision. However, in practical gameplay, starting with the approximation of frictionless perfectly elastic
collisions and making corrections as needed is often sufficient.
   If gravity is disregarded, three factors are involved in the adjustment: friction between the colliding
balls (proportional to the friction coefficient µ), deviation from a perfectly elastic collision (e∗ − 1), and
friction between the ball and the table. Recent studies by Peskin [17] considered the collision of rotating
billiard balls, taking into account the friction between the balls. However, no solutions considering the
effects of inelastic collisions and friction with the floor currently exist.
   The billiard table serves two roles during the collision of balls. Firstly, it provides normal forces to
the balls during the collision that prevent them from falling. Secondly, it imparts frictional force to the
balls, proportional to the vertical normal force. Frequently, it was assumed that significant changes in the
vertical normal force do not occur before the collision ends to ignore the effect of this frictional force. If
this assumption holds, the collision between two balls can be much simplified. On the contrary, if this
assumption is incorrect, friction with the floor will affect the post-collision motion of the balls. In reality,
billiard balls roll on a smooth cloth laid over a hard surface. Therefore, the object providing vertical
support force to the balls is the hard surface, and the cloth plays the role of providing friction with the
balls.
   The collision time between two colliding billiard balls is approximately 250 µs < ∆t < 300 µs. Let the
cue ball’s velocity before the collision be Ui and its mass be M . Then, the impact force of approximately
M Ui /∆t acts between the balls during the collision. This force, delivering an impact roughly equivalent to
the magnitude of momentum during the collision time, is approximately 400 times greater than the force of
gravity acting on the balls. Using the friction coefficient between the balls (1) (µ ∼ 0.05), the magnitude
of the frictional force (f ∼ µF⊥ ) between the balls due to rotation is approximately 20 times greater
than the gravity. Only when the cue ball collides with the object ball at a very low speed (∼ 5 cm/s),
the frictional force’s magnitude becomes comparable to gravity. When friction acts in the direction of
lifting the cue ball upward, the force pressing the cue ball against the table disappears. Consequently,
the vertical normal force exerted by the table on the cue ball would become zero. The magnitude of the
impulse imparted to the cue ball by this frictional force is approximately f ∆t ∼ µF⊥ ∆t = µM Ui , and
the resulting vertical height gained by the ball, regardless of collision time, is approximately given by:
                                                        µ2 Ui2
                                                   h=
                                                         2g
For a collision with an initial speed of Ui = 10 m/s and a friction coefficient of µ ≈ 0.05, this yields
h ≈ 1.3 cm, which is an observable value. However, for slower cue ball speeds, such as Ui ≈ 1 m/s, the

                                                        3
         height h becomes ∼ 10−2 cm, making it practically imperceptible. In such a situation, if the assumption
         mentioned in the previous paragraph is correct, the object ball would move in the downward direction
         with the same speed. Consequently, the object ball would collide with and rebound off the surface of the
         table instantly. In typical situations, when the cue is used to strike the cue ball horizontally, causing the
         two balls to collide with equal heights, one will observe that one of the balls (either the cue ball or the
         object ball) tends to rise, while the other moves horizontally1 , depending on the direction of rotation,
         which is contrary to the previous expectation.
             These observations suggest that the assumption may not be appropriate depending on situation that
         significant changes in the vertical normal force do not occur before the collision ends to ignore the effect
         of the frictional force with the table so that the role of the table is negligible in the collision. On the other
         hand, if the frictional force lifts the cue ball, the reactional force tends to push the object ball downward.
         The magnitude of this frictional force is significantly greater than gravity, making it impossible to ignore.
         Then, the normal force exerted by the floor on the object ball cannot be neglected either. Additionally,
         the frictional force between the object ball and the table would also large, particularly due to the static
         friction present when the object ball is at rest before the collision. The static friction between the table
         and the ball, which brings the ball to a stop, is determined by the material of the table surface. Since the
         collision occurs in a very short time, the fiber material cannot respond during the collision. Therefore, the
         table and the ball experience the maximum static friction during the collision time. This static friction is
         significantly larger than other frictional forces, making it a crucial factor that causes significant deviation
         from the results expected in a perfectly elastic collision.

             The equations of motion for the collision between two balls with equal masses will be formulated
         in Section II. Section III will demonstrate how these equations are utilized during the collision process.
         Section IV will analyze the collision results, and finally, Section V will summarize the research findings in
         this paper.

         2     Equations of motion for the two ball collisions on a plane
         Let the mass of the cue ball and the object ball be denoted as M , and their radii as R. Assume both
         balls move on a flat table, which is parallel to the (x, y) plane. Consider colliding the cue ball, which is
                                          ⃗ i = (Uix , Uiy , 0) and angular velocity ω
         in motion with a center velocity U                                          ⃗ i before the collision, with the
         static object ball. Assume that both balls are of the same size, the table is horizontal, and the balls do
         not rise before the collision; hence, the collision plane is perpendicular to the table, as shown in Figure 2.
         Define the direction from the center of the cue ball through the collision point to the center of the object
         ball as the x-direction and the intersection of the collision plane (the (y, z)-plane in Figure 2) and the
                                                                 ⃗ i of the cue ball before the collision be inclined
         table as the y-direction. Here, let the center velocity U
   1
       Note that in certain cases during a game, the cue may be tilted to intentionally create a height difference between the two
balls during collision, resulting in a more significant vertical impulse.

                                                                  4
       by an angle ϕ with respect to the x-axis, as shown in Figure 1. Finally, choose the z-axis as the vertical
       upward direction perpendicular to the table. This arrangement is illustrated in Figure 2. In the following,

Figure 2: Various forces acting during the collision of the cue ball and the object ball. The cue/object ball is placed on the
left/right.

                                                                              ⃗ and V
       we denote the center velocities of the cue ball and the object ball as U     ⃗ , respectively, and their

       angular velocities as ω     ⃗
                             ⃗ and Ω.
              As illustrated in Figure 2, the force F⃗ exerted by the cue ball on the object ball during the collision,
       consists of the sum of the force F⃗x = (F⊥ , 0, 0) in the x-direction perpendicular and the friction force
       f⃗ acting parallel to the collision plane. The friction force acts in the opposite direction to the relative
       velocity of the collision point and its magnitude is generally given by the product of the friction coefficient
       µ and the normal force F⊥ , with its direction determined by the angle θ with the horizontal direction
       (choose the positive y-direction so that −π/2 ≤ θ ≤ π/2):

                                              f⃗ = (0, f cos θ, f sin θ),   f = µF⊥ .                                (3)

       Thus, if there is topspin or draw on the cue ball (ωy ≶ 0), the angle θ satisfies θ ≷ 0.
              Listing the forces acting on the cue ball, −F⃗ = (−F⊥ , 0, 0) − f⃗ is the reaction to the action of the cue
       ball on the object ball (due to friction and normal force). f⃗t is the friction on the cue ball exerted by the
       table, and F⃗N is the normal force supporting the cue ball on the table, respectively. Finally, F⃗g represents
       the gravitational force acting on the cue ball. As discussed earlier, the normal force F⃗N supporting the

                                                                   5
         cue ball on the table must counterbalance the sum of the vertical forces due to gravity and friction with
         the object ball. Therefore,

                                        F⃗N ≡ FN ẑ;      FN = (M g + f sin θ)Θ(θ + θc ),                              (4)

         where θc ≡ arcsin(M g/µF⊥ ) and Θ(x) is the Heaviside step function. If the frictional force in the vertical
         direction is greater than or equal to the gravitational force (M g+µF⊥ sin θ < 0), the normal force becomes
         zero, and the cue ball moves upward due to the collision. The friction force f⃗t on the table is given by the
         product of the normal force magnitude FN and the coefficient of friction between the ball and the table. If
         the cue ball was rolling before the collision, the friction coefficient is very small (µrolling ∼ 10−2 ), and the
         friction force can be neglected during the rolling motion. Assuming a smooth table surface compared to
         the cue ball, the friction force does not significantly affect the ball’s motion before the collision ends. If the
         collision occurs in a sliding state before the collision, the sliding friction coefficient µbt ∼ 0.1 comes into
         play, and in this case, the frictional force is relatively large compared to the rolling case. The magnitude
         of the friction force with the table is given by

                                                 ft = µbt FN ∼ µbt µF⊥ Θ(θ + θc ).                                     (5)

         Depending on the situation, if the vertical force becomes very large, the friction with the table cannot be
         ignored. However, it still acts as a second-order approximation since its magnitude is proportional to the
         product of the two friction coefficients. Therefore, in this paper, we assume that the friction between the
         cue ball and the table can be ignored compared to F⊥ .
             Similarly, for the object ball, the forces include the force exerted by the cue ball F⃗ , the friction force
         from the table f⃗t′ , and the normal force supporting the object ball F⃗N′ . Finally, the gravitational force on
         the object ball is represented by F⃗g . During the collision, the normal force on the object ball is given by

                                        F⃗N′ ≡ FN′ ẑ;    FN′ = (M g − f sin θ)Θ(θc − θ).                              (6)

         The object ball stands still before the collision and then starts moving. As discussed in the introduction,
         the object ball, being supported by the soft fibers of the table, experiences motion only influenced by
         these fibers during the short moment of collision. In this brief moment, the displacement of the object ball
         is extremely small, to the extent that it is difficult to consider it moving through other fiber materials.
         Therefore, during the collision, the frictional force between the object ball and the table is given by static
         friction. The maximum static friction coefficient2 is approximately

                                                         0.2 < µs < 0.4.
   2
       To measure the static friction coefficients between the table and billiard balls, we perform an experiment. Three balls
were bonded together using adhesive to prevent sliding. A weight was then used to gradually pull the set of three balls until
slipping occurred. The force required to initiate sliding was measured, and from these experiments, the maximum static friction
coefficient (µs ) was determined. The obtained values help characterize the static frictional interaction between the table and
billiard balls.

                                                                 6
This value, being relatively larger than the coefficients of kinetic friction or rolling friction, cannot be
ignored, and its influence is notable in the context of the interaction with the table. The relative velocity,
⃗= = −ẑ × ẑ × (V
V                ⃗ + Rẑ × Ω),
                           ⃗ of the contact point of the object ball with the table will be given by

the sum of the translational velocity and the rotational velocity of the object ball. The rotational motion
of the object ball is developed by the friction between the two balls, which can be considered negligible
compared to the translational motion. In addition, consulting the result of the perfectly elastic collision,
the motion of the object ball mainly directed to the x-direction. The friction force acts in the opposite
direction of relative motion. Therefore, for the friction force f⃗g′ , it can be approximated as

                                                 f⃗g′ ≈ −fg′ V̂= ,                                              (7)

                                 ⃗
where V̂= is defined as V̂= ≡ |VV⃗= | ≈ x̂. The magnitude of the friction force between the objective ball and
                                  =

the table is given by
                                                    fg′ = µs FN′ ,

where FN′ is the normal force supporting the object ball. If we neglect gravity, this frictional effect is
only significant when there is topspin of the cueball.
   As discussed in the introduction, if the cue ball is moving rapidly (Ui ≳ 1 m/sec)and collides with the
objective ball at an angle θ ≁ 0, the vertical component of the frictional force becomes significantly larger
than the gravitational force. Therefore, in this case, it is permissible to approximate the normal force as

                                 FN ≈ f sin θ Θ(θ),            FN′ ≈ −f sin θ Θ(−θ).                            (8)

The subsequent calculations will utilize this approximation.

   Following the discussion above, the equations of motion for the changes in the center velocities of the
cue ball and the objective ball can be written as:
               ⃗
              dU
        M          = −F⃗ + f⃗t + F⃗g + F⃗N ≈ F⊥ [−x̂ − µ cos θ ŷ − µ sin θΘ(−θ)ẑ] ,
              dt
               ⃗
              dV
        M          = F⃗ + f⃗t′ + F⃗g + F⃗N′ ≈ F⊥ [(1 + µs µ sin θ Θ(−θ)) x̂ + µ cos θ ŷ + µ sin θ Θ(θ)ẑ] ,    (9)
              dt

where F⊥ is the perpendicular component of the collision force. The rotational motion equations for the
changes in the angular velocities ω     ⃗ of the cue ball and the objective ball are given by:
                                  ⃗ and Ω

              d⃗
               ω
          I        = ⃗τ−f + ⃗τfg = Rx̂ × (−f⃗) − Rẑ × f⃗g ≈ RµF⊥ (sin θ ŷ − cos θ ẑ),
              dt
               ⃗
              dΩ
          I        = ⃗τf + ⃗τfg′ = (−Rx̂) × f⃗ − Rẑ × f⃗g′ ≈ µRF⊥ {sin θ [1 + µs Θ(−θ)] ŷ − cos θ ẑ} ,      (10)
              dt

where, I = νM R2 represents the rotational inertia of the ball with ν = 2/5 for a uniformly dense sphere. In
these equations, the first/second term represent the torques due to the collision between the balls and due
to the friction between the balls and the table, respectively. As observed, neglecting the friction with the
table (µs → 0), would imply equal changes in the angular velocities of both balls. However, as discussed
earlier, the value of the static friction coefficient cannot be easily dismissed.

                                                           7
   The frictional forces between the cue ball and the object ball act in the opposite direction of the
relative velocity at the point of collision. To calculate the relative velocity at the point of collision for
                                                                                                   ⃗ c = Rx̂.
each ball, let’s denote the displacement from the center of the cue ball to the collision point as R
                                                                ⃗ +ω
The velocity at the collision point of the cue ball is given by U     ⃗ c , and for the objective ball, it is
                                                                   ⃗ ×R
⃗ +Ω
V  ⃗ ×R
      ⃗ o , where R
                  ⃗ o = −R
                         ⃗ c . Therefore, the relative velocity of the objective ball with respect to the

cue ball at the two contact points is given by

                                            ⃗ −U
                                       ⃗v = V  ⃗ −R
                                                  ⃗o × Ω
                                                       ⃗ +R
                                                          ⃗c × ω
                                                               ⃗.

Conversely, the relative velocity of the cue ball with respect to the objective ball at the contact point is
−⃗v . The initial values of the relative velocities are given by

         vx (0) = v⊥ (0) = v⊥0 = −Ui cos ϕ,          vy (0) = −Ui sin ϕ − Rωz (0),       vz (0) = Rωy (0).   (11)

Here, the initial directional angle θ0 for the frictional force satisfies tan θ0 = vz0 /vy0 , and
                                               q
                              v∥ (0) = v∥0 =       [Ui sin ϕ + Rωz (0)]2 + R2 ωy2 (0).                       (12)

Because the friction acts along the opposite direction to the relative velocity, the angle satisfies

                           Ui sin ϕ/R + ωz0                                      −ωy0
           cos θ0 = − q                           ,        sin θ0 = q                                .       (13)
                                               2
                       (Ui sin ϕ/R + ωz0 )2 + ωy0                                               2
                                                                        (Ui sin ϕ/R − ωz0 )2 + ωy0

The time-dependent change in the relative velocity is then given by
                                                                                                 
        d⃗v     F⊥                             2(1 + ν)              2 + ν + µs Θ(−θ)
             =        2 + µs µ sin θ Θ(−θ) x̂ +           µ cos θ ŷ +                  µ sin θ ẑ ,         (14)
        dt      M                                    ν                        ν

where we use Eqs. (9) and (10).
   Let’s denote the normal (perpendicular to the collision plane) impulse exerted on the balls during the
collision as
                                                      p ≡ p⊥ .                                               (15)

This value monotonically increases during the collision. We will use this impulse in place of time. Define
the impulses in the directions perpendicular and parallel to the collision plane during the short time dt as

                dp ≡ dp⊥ = F⊥ dt = M dV⊥ ,      dp∥ = F∥ dt = f dt = µF⊥ dt = M dV∥ = µdp⊥ ,                 (16)

respectively. Now, the equations of motion (9) can be expressed by multiplying both sides by dt and using
the defined expressions as follows:

                        ⃗
                     M dU     = dp [−x̂ − µ cos θ ŷ − µ sin θΘ(−θ)ẑ] ,
                        ⃗
                     M dV     = dp [(1 + µs µ sin θ Θ(−θ)) x̂ + µ cos θ ŷ + µ sin θ Θ(θ)ẑ]                 (17)

Regarding the change in angular velocity in (10), when expressed in terms of impulse, it becomes:

                                              IdΩy
                  Idωy ≈ µR sin θ dp ≈                 ,         Idωz ≈ −µRdp⊥ cos θ ≈ IdΩz .                (18)
                                          1 + µs Θ(−θ)

                                                          8
Here, ≈ indicates an approximation neglecting gravity and friction between the ball and the table.
    The change in relative velocity with respective to the impulse can be obtained as follows:
                                                                                                
              dp⊥                            2(1 + ν)              2 + ν + µs Θ(−θ)
        d⃗v =        2 + µs µ sin θ Θ(−θ) x̂ +          µ cos θ ŷ +                  µ sin θ ẑ            (19)
               M                                   ν                        ν
Here, recalling that
                                       vy ≡ −v∥ cos θ,       vz = −v∥ sin θ                                 (20)

and utilizing v∥ dθ = sin θ dvy − cos θ dvz , we find
                                                 µ sin 2θ dp⊥ ν − µs Θ(−θ)
                                       v∥ dθ =                             .                                (21)
                                                      2M           ν
As observed from this equation, the angle θ, which indicates the direction in which frictional force is
acting, changes over time. Because ν(= 2/5) > µs , dθ becomes negative when θ < 0, causing the angle θ
to decrease. The change in the angle becomes zero at θ = 0, ±π/2 and reaches its maximum at θ = ±π/4,
happening in the direction of increasing |θ|.
    In both cases, there is no event during the collision that reverses the sign of the angle θ. Moreover, as
evident from the equations of motion, the friction coefficient µs always comes with a step function Θ(−θ),
and the sign of θ does not change during the motion. Therefore, for simplicity, we will denote µs Θ(−θ)
as µs later in this work.

3      Collision process
In this section, we aim to provide a detailed chronological description of the process that occurs at the
moment when billiard balls collide. To illustrate the sequence of physical phenomena during the collision
process, we focus on the impulse p ≡ p⊥ acting in the perpendicular direction to the collision plane. If
there is no adhesive force between the balls on the collision plane, the impulse p monotonically increases
over time during the collision process.

    1. Sliding state: The moment the cue ball reaches the object ball, both balls enter a state of sliding
       against each other. At the moment of collision, the cue ball simultaneously pushes the object ball
       vertically with a speed of Ui cos ϕ while sliding on the surface of the ball with a speed of Ui sin ϕ.
       This sliding is gradually slowed down by friction, and if the friction coefficient is denoted as µ, the
       impulse due to frictional force is given by

                                                        dp∥ = µdp                                           (22)

       Here, we assume that the friction coefficient is independent of the sliding speed or vertical pressure,
       which is valid as long as the sliding speed on most surfaces is not too fast. In collisions between balls,
       the friction coefficient µ is not large, making it difficult to enter a stick state where sliding stops.
       During sliding, changes in the horizontal and vertical components of relative velocity are given by
                   dvy    2µ ν + 1 vy            dvz    µ ν + 2 + µs vz        dv⊥   2 + µµs sin θ
                       =−             ,              =−                 ,          =                        (23)
                   dp     M ν v∥                 dp     M     ν      v∥         dp        M

                                                         9
As mentioned earlier, µs represents µs Θ(−θ). The last equation indicates that for θ > 0, v⊥ linearly
varies with the vertical impulse. On the other hand, for θ < 0, v⊥ no longer linearly varies with p.
Due to the step function, the equation (23) needs to be solved separately for each case where θ is
negative or positive. Fortunately, the results for the case of θ > 0 can be obtained by solving the
case of θ < 0 first and then taking the limit, µs → 0. Therefore, it is sufficient to solve the case of
θ < 0. In this case, vy < 0, vz > 0. Integrating the first two equations yields a conserved quantity
during the collision process:
                                                          2(1+ν)             2+ν+µs
                        2(1+ν)
                      −            2+ν+µs           vy     µs −ν
                                                                        vy    µs −ν
                v̄ ≡ vz µs −ν |vy | µs −ν   = |vy |                = vz               = constant.   (24)
                                                    vz                  vz
Thus, the magnitude
           q        of the component
                             q       parallel to the collision plane of the relative velocity is given
                    1/ay                 1/az
by v∥ = |vy | 1 + xy       = |vz | 1 + xz       . Here,
                                             1+ν                   2 + ν + µs
                                   ay ≡ −           ,     az ≡                ,                     (25)
                                             ν − µs                2(ν − µs )
and
                                 vy         a y                     vz
                        xy ≡        = tan2 θ ,              xz ≡        = (tan2 θ)−az .             (26)
                                 v̄                                  v̄
From the initial values (11), it follows that
                                                                             2az
                                                          Rωy (0)
                                   v̄ = |Rωy (0)|
                                                    Ui sin ϕ + Rωz (0)
Using this, the first two equations in Eq. (23) become
                                                   µβk
                              q
                                      1/a
                                 1 + xk k dxk = −      dp,               k = y, z,                  (27)
                                                   mv̄
where
                                            ν+1                    ν + 2 + µs
                                    βy =        ,         βz =                                      (28)
                                             ν                         2ν
The differential equations (27) can be integrated using hypergeometric functions:
                                                              µβk p
                                             Vk = Vk0 −             .                               (29)
                                                               mv̄
Here,                          Z xk p
                                                                                   1/a
              Vk ≡ Fak (xk ) ≡       1 + x1/ak dx = xk 2 F1 (−1/2, ak , 1 + ak , −xk k ),           (30)

and Vk0 (k = y, z) is determined by the relative velocity components vy (0), vz (0) at p = 0. This
function monotonically increases in the region, x > 0. Finally, considering the motion perpendicular
to the collision plane from the last equation of (23), we get
                                          µµs p                  µs [vz − vz (0)]
                                              Z
                                     p                       p
                      v⊥ − v⊥ (0) =    +          sin θdp =    +                  .                 (31)
                                     m    M                 m          2βz
Here, m ≡ M/2 and Eq. (57) in appendix is used.
The results for positive θ can be obtained by taking the limit as µs → 0. For example, in the case
of relative velocity perpendicular to the collision plane, equation (31) simplifies to v⊥ = p/m. If
v∥ ≈ 0, even with a small friction coefficient, a stick state can be entered in a short time, but this
paper does not consider such possibility.

                                                    10
2. Maximally compressed state: As the relative vertical velocity decreases, the two balls are com-
   pressed, and energy is accumulated. Let’s denote the vertical impulse at the moment when this
   vertical compression stops, i.e., when v⊥ = 0, as p⊥ = pc . At that moment, the relative vertical
   velocity is 0, and the following equations hold:

                                    pc   µs [vz (pc ) − vz (0)]                              µβk pc
                 v⊥ (pc ) = v⊥0 +      +                        = 0,   Vk (pc ) = Vk (0) −          .            (32)
                                    m             2βz                                         mv̄

   By solving the first equation and the second equation for k = z, we can determine the value of pc .
   In the case of θ > 0, taking the µs → 0 limit yields the result that the vertical impulse up to the
   moment of maximum compression is pc = −mv⊥0 = mUi cos ϕ.
   The total energy absorbed during the compression process can be obtained by integrating the force
   acting in the vertical direction over the displacement. If the vertical component of the relative
   velocity varies linearly with the impulse during compression, the magnitude of the work done as the
   vertical impulse increases from 0 to pc can be expressed using equations (23), (31), and (30):
                              Z pc                                              Z pc
                                                       p2
                                                                                          
                                                             µs
               W⊥ (pc ) =          v⊥ dp⊥ = v⊥0 pc + c +             −vz0 pc +       dpvz
                               0                      2m 2βz                     0
                                                  "                                            #
                                         2
                                        pc   µs              M v̄ 2 F2az (x2z ) − F2az (x2z (0))
                         = v⊥0 pc +        −        vz0 pc +                                       . (33)
                                       2m 2βz                4µ                  βz

   In the case of θ > 0, taking the limit as µs → 0 simplifies the result to the first two terms of equation
   (33).

3. Restoration process: At the moment when the vertical velocities of the cue ball and the object ball
   become equal, both balls stop compressing and enter the restoration process. During this period, as
   the shapes of the two balls return to their original state, the elastic energy accumulated during the
   compression process is utilized to push each other away. Let’s denote the final value of the vertical
   impulse obtained during the restoration process as pf , and explore the kinetic energy restored during
   this process. Since both balls are in a sliding state during the restoration process, the vertical and
   horizontal impulses satisfy a similar form of equation as in (32). Integrating this equation up to
   pc ∼ pf determines the final state.
   The final horizontal relative velocity is given by (29):

                                                     µβk                    µβk
                             Vk (pf ) = Vk (pc ) −       (pf − pc ) = Vk0 −     pf .                             (34)
                                                     mv̄                    mv̄

   Therefore, the current assumption that the friction is small enough not to reach a stick state still
   holds if µβ
             m pf < Vk0 for k = y, z. As it is still in a sliding state, the vertical relative velocity also
              k

   satisfies equation (31). Thus,

                                     pf    µs                  pf − pc    µs
                   v⊥f = v⊥ (0) +       +     [vzf − vz (0)] =         +     [vzf − vz (pc )],                   (35)
                                     m    2βz                     m      2βz
                                                                                                        pf −pc
   where, in the second equality, the first equation of (32) is used. If θ is positive, v⊥ (pf ) =        m      can
   be expressed more succinctly.

                                                      11
      The elastic energy restored during the restoration process can be calculated using the above equation:
                                  Z pc            Z pf                                 
                                                         p − pc       µs
        W⊥ (pf ) − W⊥ (pc ) ≡           v⊥ dp⊥ =                  +      [vz − vz (pc )] dp
                                    0               pc      m        2βz
                                              2
                                                                             M v̄ 2 
                                                                                                                
                                   (pf − pc )      µs
                              =                 −       vz (pc )(pf − pc ) +          F2az (x2zf ) − F2aa (x2zc ) (36)
                                                                                                                    .
                                       2m         2βz                        4µβz

   From the above results, the ratio of absorbed elastic energy during the compression process to the
restored energy can be related to the square of the (energy) coefficient of restitution, given by:
                                                      W⊥ (pf ) − W⊥ (pc )
                                            e2∗ = −                       .                                      (37)
                                                           W⊥ (pc )
Here, e∗ represents the energetic coefficient of restitution between the cue ball and the object ball [15].
From this equation, one can write the value of pf in terms of the initial value. Generally, although this
equation presents a complex relationship, in the case of θ > 0, the right side of this equation is simplified,
                2
           p
and e2∗ = pfc − 1 is given. Therefore, in this case, pf = (1+e∗ )mUi cos ϕ. In general, pf has a correction
term proportional to µs in addition to the above equation:

                                        pf = (1 + e∗ )mUi cos ϕ + µs δpf .                                       (38)

   Using the above results to find the post-collision velocity of the cue ball, with the help of (17) and
(57), we have:
                                         Z pf
                                       1               1 − e∗              µs δpf
                    U⊥f    =    U⊥i −         dp⊥ =           Ui cos ϕ −          ,
                                      M 0                 2                 M
                                         Z pf
                                      µ                                1
                    Uyf    =    Uyi −         cos θ dp = Ui sin ϕ −       [vy (pf ) − vy (0)],
                                      M 0                            2βy
                                      µΘ(−θ) pf
                                               Z
                                                                   1
                    Uzf    ≈    Uzi −               sin θ dp = −      [vz (pf ) − vz (0)]Θ(−θ),                  (39)
                                         M      0                 2βz
where vk (pf ) is obtained from equation (34), and vk (0) is obtained from equation (11). Also, Uzi = 0.
The post-collision velocity of the object ball is given by:
                         Z
                       1                             1 + e∗             µs δpf    µs
          V⊥f =             (1 + µµs sin θ)dp⊥ =            Ui cos ϕ +         +     [vz (p) − vz (0)] ,
                      M                                 2                  M     2βz
                         Z
                       µ                 1
          Vyf =             cos θ dp =      [vy (pf ) − vy (0)],
                      M                 2βy
                             Z
                      µΘ(θ)                  1
           Vzf =                sin θ dp =       [vz (pf ) − vz (0)] Θ(θ).                                       (40)
                        M                  2βz
In the y-direction, the law of conservation of momentum holds, but it does not hold in the x and z-
directions. This phenomenon occurs due to the counteracting effect of vertical forces, neutralizing the
impact of frictional forces.
   The angular velocities of the two balls after the collision become

                      ω⊥f − ω⊥i     = 0 = Ω⊥f ,
                                                         M R vzf − vzi
                                           Z
                                      µR                                      Ωyf
                       ωyf − ωyi    =         dp sin θ =               =               ,
                                       I                   I    2βz       1 + µs Θ(−θ)
                                                             M R vyf − vyi
                                             Z
                                        µR
                       ωzf − ωzi    = −         dp cos θ = −               = Ωzf ,                               (41)
                                         I                    I     2βy

                                                           12
as derived from (18). Utilizing the above results to compare the energy before and after the collision, one
may notice that the conservation of kinetic energy does not hold when there is friction and the coefficient
of restitution is not 1.

4     Linear approximation for the motion of the cue ball and object
ball after the collision
In the previous section, we discussed the collision between two balls in a general form. However, in the
case of a collision between billiard balls, the magnitude of the coefficient of friction µ between the balls is
not large, resulting in a small change in the relative velocity in the direction parallel to the collision plane.
In such cases, it is sufficient to use linear approximation by expanding the function Vk with k = y, z
around the initial values.
    Firstly, from the definition of the function Fa in Eq. (30), we obtain the following expansion:
                                                        "                                  #
                                      q                            1/a−1
                                             1/a               1 x0
                  Fa (x) − Fa (x0 ) ≈ 1 + x0 (x − x0 ) 1 +                (x − x0 ) + · · · .               (42)
                                                              2a 1 + x1/a
                                                                      0

We have described up to quadratic approximation, as it is necessary for expanding the coefficient of
restitution formula (37) to the linear approximation in terms of the friction coefficient µ. Conversely, we
can also use
                                                                                                 
                                                             1/a−1
                             Fa (x) − Fa (x0 )      1      x0                           
                x − x0 ≈                       1 −                     Fa (x) − Fa (x0 ) + · · ·  .       (43)
                                                                                                  
                               q                                    3/2
                                       1/a          2a 
                                                              1/a
                                                                  
                                  1 + x0                 1 + x0

    First, we calculate vzf −vzi , which is necessary to obtain the value needed for expanding the coefficient
of restitution formula, up to quadratic approximation in terms of µ. Using Eqs. (29) and (43), we get
                                                                                     
                                            µp| sin θ0 |     µs − ν          µp
                       |vz | − |vz0 | ≈ −βz               1−        cos2 θ0      + ··· .
                                                m              2ν           mv∥0
The calculation process uses Eq. (20) and Eq. (26) also. If θ < 0, vz > 0, so removing the absolute value
on the left-hand side is not a problem. On the right-hand side, the − sign can be absorbed into sin θ0 . If
θ > 0, the entire left-hand side gets a − sign, allowing us to cancel the absolute value and the − sign on
the right. Therefore, the following generally holds:
                                                                             
                                        µp sin θ0     ν − µs    2    µp
                          vz − vz0 = βz            1+        cos θ0      + ··· .                            (44)
                                           m            2ν          mv∥0
In future calculations, vyf − vyi only needs to be approximated up to the first order in µ. Using Eq. (29)
and vy < 0, we get:
                                                      Vy − Vy0                 µp cos θ0
                   vy − vy0 = −(|vy | − |vy0 |) ≈ −v̄ q           + · · · = βy           + ···              (45)
                                                             1/ay                 m
                                                        1 + xy0

    Then, let’s solve for pc using Eq. (32) by determining it around the initial value. From the first equation,
we get:                                                                               
                                       pc   µµs p sin θ0      µs − ν          µp
                   v⊥ (pc ) = v⊥0 +       +                1−        cos2 θ0      + ··· = 0
                                       m        2m              2ν           mv∥0

                                                          13
Therefore, the following holds:                                  
                                                pc     µµs sin θ0
                                        v⊥0 = −     1+              + ···                                   (46)
                                                m          2

   Now, using the above results and the coefficient of restitution formula (37), let’s determine pf . First,
during the contraction, the elastic energy accumulated in the ball can be obtained from (33). Using (44)
and (46), we get:

                                     p2                         M v̄ 2 
                                                                                                     
                                            µs Θ(−θ)
                            v⊥0 pc + c +                                 F2az (x2z ) − F2az (x2z (0))
                                                                                                     
            W⊥ (pc )   =                              −vz0 pc −
                                     2m        2βz              4µβz
                                    µµs sin θ0 p2c
                                             
                       ≈    − 1+                   .                                                        (47)
                                        2       2m

Here, vz0 = −v∥0 sin θ0 and if µs ̸= 0, θ < 0 is used. The elastic energy recovered in the restoration process
can be obtained from (36). Using a similar process as above, we get:

                              (pf − pc )2                              M v̄ 2 
                                                                                                         
                                             µs                                        2             2
     W⊥ (pf ) − W⊥ (pc ) =                −       vz (pc )(pf − pc ) +          F2az (xzf ) − F2aa (xzc )
                                  2m        2βz                        4µβz
                              (pf − pc )2 h    µµs         i
                         ≈                 1+      sin θc .                                                  (48)
                                  2m            2

Now, using (37), we have:
                                                       2
                                                pf           2 + µµs sin θc
                                    e2∗ =          −1                       + O(µ2 ).
                                                pc           2 + µµs sin θ0
Here, θc − θ0 ∼ O(µ), so we obtain:

                                                pf ≈ 1 + e∗ + O(µ2 ) pc
                                                                   
                                                                                                            (49)

In other words, up to the first-order approximation in µ, the vertical impulse is determined by the
coefficient of restitution. Therefore, using (46) and (11), the final vertical impulse is given by:
                                                                             
                                                             µµs sin θ0
                               pf = (1 + e∗ )mUi cos ϕ 1 −              + ··· .                             (50)
                                                                  2

Comparing this equation with (38), the impulse correction is:

                                                                         µ sin θ0
                                        δpf = −(1 + e∗ )mUi cos ϕ                                           (51)
                                                                            2

   Now, we write the velocities of the cue ball and the object ball after the collision given by Eqs. (39)
and (40):
                                                                    
                ⃗f                     1 − e∗    µµs (1 + e∗ ) sin θ0
                U      ≈   Ui cos ϕ           +                          x̂
                                          2               4
                                                                                           
                                        µ(1 + e∗ ) cos θ0         µ(1 + e∗ )
                           + tan ϕ −                        ŷ −             sin θ0 Θ(−θ)ẑ ,               (52)
                                               2                       2
                                                                                                    
                ⃗f         1 + e∗                 µµs sin θ0
                V      ≈          Ui cos ϕ 1 +                   x̂ + µ cos θ0 ŷ + µ sin θ0 Θ(θ0 ) ẑ      (53)
                              2                        2

In the case where there is a draw, i.e., θ0 > 0, one can take the limit µs → 0 in the above results. As seen
from these equations, for θ0 < 0, the friction between the object ball and the ground reduces the speed

                                                              14
      in the direction perpendicular to the collision plane by the same amount for both the cue ball and the
      object ball.
          Now, let’s examine the changes in angular velocity for the cue ball and the object ball. Firstly, there
      is no change in angular velocity component in the direction perpendicular to the collision plane. On the
      other hand, the angular velocity components along y and z-directions change according to Eq. (41):

                                                µ(1 + e∗ ) Ui cos ϕ
                                ⃗f − ω
                                ω    ⃗i    =                        [sin θ0 ŷ − cos θ0 ẑ] ,
                                                   2ν         R
                                     ⃗f         µ(1 + e∗ ) Ui cos ϕ
                                     Ω     =                        [(1 + µs ) sin θ0 ŷ − cos θ0 ẑ]               (54)
                                                   2ν         R

      This means that the object ball obtains a larger angular velocity with a higher initial horizontal speed
      and a larger friction coefficient. Additionally, we observe that the friction between the object ball and the
      ground only contributes to the change in the angular velocity of the object ball when there is a draw.

      5      Analysis of the results and discussions
      In this work, we discusse the phenomenon that occurs when a cue ball, rotating on a plane, approaches
      and collides with a static object ball of equal mass. In the case of billiard balls, the coefficient of restitution
      is close to 1, and the friction coefficient takes a value close to 0, demonstrating a collision phenomenon
      close to a perfectly elastic collision. In this scenario, immediately after the collision, the trajectories of
      the cue ball and the object ball form a right angle with each other. The cue ball moves in the direction
      parallel to the collision plane, while the object ball moves in the direction perpendicular to the collision
                                                                               ⃗ i represents the velocity of the
      plane. This situation is illustrated in Figure 3 using red arrows, where U
                                         ⃗ ⊥ and U
      cue ball before the collision, and U       ⃗ ∥ represent the velocities of the object ball and the cue ball,

      respectively, after a perfectly elastic collision on the table.

Figure 3: The velocity changes of the cue ball and the object ball before and after the collision (ignoring the component of
velocity in the direction perpendicular to the table)

          In this paper, three effects which develop deviations from the results of a perfectly elastic collision in
      the collision of balls are discussed. These three effects are: 1) the collision between balls is not perfectly

                                                                15
elastic, 2) the effect of friction between balls during collision, and 3) the effect of friction between the ball
and the table at the moment of collision.
   Before discussing the detailed results of all these effects, let’s first consider the scenario where a cue ball
with topspin collides head-on with an object ball, taking into account the presence of frictions, the topic we
mentioned at the beginning of the introduction. Firstly, assume that the cue ball has only rolling motion
before the collision. Therefore, θ0 = −π/2. In a head-on collision, ϕ = 0. To simplify the discussion, we
assume a perfectly elastic collision, implying e∗ = 1. As discussed earlier, the effects of friction between the
object ball and the table are valid only when there is topspin in the cue ball. Therefore, we interpret the
friction coefficient µs in Eqs. (52) and (53) as µs Θ(−θ0 ), where Θ is the step function. Then, the velocities
                                                              ⃗ f ≈ µUi − µs x̂ + ẑ , V⃗f ≈ Ui 1 − µµs x̂. If
                                                                                                        
of the cue ball and the object ball after the collision are: U              2                         2

there is no friction between the balls (µ = 0), as expected, the cue ball comes to a stop, and the object
ball moves with the same speed as the cue ball. However, when there is friction between the balls and
between the object ball and the table, after the collision, the cue ball moves backward at a rate slower
by the factor µs /2 compared to the speed at which it would jump into the air. Of course, this backward
motion will soon turn into forward motion due to the friction when the cue ball collides with the table
again under the influence of gravity. Similarly, the object ball also moves slower by the same amount
compared to its speed without friction with the table. This result clearly demonstrates that the friction
between the object ball and the table cannot be ignored in the collision of two balls.

   Now, let’s describe the detailed results of the collision. Firstly, the phenomena arising from the dif-
ference with a perfectly elastic collision, due to the absence of friction, are proportional to (1 − e∗ ). This
manifests as the appearance of the vertical velocity U⊥f of the cue ball and the decrease of V⊥f of the
object ball. The phenomena solely caused by the friction between the cue ball and the object ball are
proportional to µ. Both balls exhibit changes in the velocity components parallel to the collision plane.
The changes in angular velocities, as seen in Eq. (54), confirm that the presence of friction between the
balls is necessary for such changes to occur. In Figure 3, the blue arrows illustrate the trajectories of the
cue ball and the object ball immediately after the collision.
   Ignoring the motion perpendicular to the billiard plane and comparing the results with a perfectly
elastic collision, the differences in the speed and the direction of the object ball are proportional to
(1 − e∗ ) and µ, respectively. Let’s examine the post-collision motion of the object ball (53) using linear
approximation. The object ball’s speed is given by:
                                                                       
                                         1 + e∗              µµs sin θ0
                                    Vf ≈        Ui cos ϕ 1 +
                                           2                     2

If we interpret (1 + e∗ )/2 as 1 − (1 − e∗ )/2, we can understand how it differs from a perfectly elastic
collision. The velocity correction due to the friction coefficient is proportional to µµs and exists only when
θ is negative (in the presence of the cue ball’s topspin).
   As seen in Eq. (39), without friction, the object ball moves along the x-direction, perpendicular to
the collision plane. If there is friction, the object ball’s velocity has components in both the y-direction

                                                       16
and the vertical upward z-direction parallel to the collision plane. The magnitude of the upward velocity
component is given by:
                                              µ(1 + e∗ )
                                     Vf z =              Ui cos ϕ sin θ0 Θ(θ0 )
                                                  2
This vertical motion is linearly proportional to the friction coefficient and occurs only when the cue ball
has an angular velocity about the y-axis, i.e., there is topspin. The directional difference is denoted by ψ
in Figure 3 and is approximately given by:

                                               ψ ≈ tan−1 (µ cos θ0 )                                         (55)

This angle is maximized when there is no initial rotational angular velocity about the y-axis, and for a
given friction coefficient according to Eq. (1), it varies by approximately 1.7◦ to 4.8◦ . As seen, the primary
cause for the object ball deviating from the direction perpendicular to the collision plane is the frictional
force between the two balls during the collision.
   When two balls of equal mass undergo a frictionless perfectly elastic collision, the cue ball moves in
the y-direction after the collision. Neglecting the vertical upward motion, the motion of the cue ball, as
seen from the first equation in (52), shows two changes. First, due to the effect of friction, the speed in
the y-direction parallel to the collision plane decreases. Second, as the collision is not perfectly elastic, the
cue ball gains a velocity component in the x-direction perpendicular to the collision plane. As a result,
the cue ball deviates from the y-direction by an angle ψc as depicted in Figure 3, given by:
                                                                            
                                                1 − e∗   µµs (1 + e∗ ) sin θ0
                           ψc ≈ tan−1 cot ϕ            +                         .                           (56)
                                                  2              4
If the cue ball engages in a perfectly elastic collision (e∗ = 1) with the object ball and has topspin (i.e.,
θ < 0), the cue ball’s direction deviates from the perpendicular direction to the collision plane because of
the frictions. On the contrary, if there is no topspin, the direction of the cue ball is towards the y-axis. If a
perfectly elastic collision does not occur, the cue ball’s direction is determined by the combined effects of
(1 − e∗ ) and the topspin effect through the friction between the object ball and the table. Calculating the
angular deviation using the friction coefficient of 0 and the range of restitution coefficient given by Eq. (2),
at ϕ = 45◦ , for e∗ = 0.92, there is an angular deviation of approximately 2.3◦ , and for e∗ = 0.98, an angular
deviation of about 0.57◦ . At ϕ = 30◦ , the deviations are approximately 4.0◦ and 1.0◦ , respectively. For
ϕ = 10◦ , an angular deviation of around 13◦ is observed for e∗ = 0.92. These deviations are substantial
and cannot be ignored. As the angle φ approaches 0 degrees (meaning closer to a head-on collision), the
speed of the cue ball significantly decreases, and its direction is strongly influenced by the effect of friction.
   As time progresses after the collision, the angle formed by the centers’ velocities of the two balls
changes due to the rotational motion. The post-collision trajectory of the balls is determined by the
velocities/angular velocities resulting from the collision and the friction with the table. If there is angular
velocity around the axis of the center’s velocity of the ball, the ball follows a curved path. In the case of
the object ball, the rotation induced by friction is not significant, and bending is not visibly apparent.
However, the cue ball, depending on the situation, can exhibit significant curvilinear motion. Further
research is needed to investigate these trajectories in detail.

                                                         17
    The results of this study contribute to the understanding of ball movements and collisions in billiards,
providing insights into strategies and gameplay. Additionally, this research can offer valuable information
in the field of physics education and experiments.

Acknowledgment
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea grants funded by the Korea
government RS-2023-00208047 and Korea National University of Transportation Industry-Academy Co-
operation Foundation in 2023.

A      Integration of the trigonometry functions
We attach an integration formula which is used frequently in the text:
                       Z p
                                           −vy dp
                                        Z
                                                            M
                            dp cos θ =              dvy =       [vy (p) − vy (0)]                      (57)
                         0                  v∥ dvy         2µβy
                        Z p
                                           −vz dp
                                        Z
                                                            M
                            dp sin θ =              dvz =       [vz (p) − vz (0)] .
                         0                  v∥ dvz         2µβz
In deriving this formula, we us Eq. (23).

References
 [1] “Amazing BILLIARDS PHYSICS in Super Slow Motion”, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NWkX9JCWCK0
     (2021).

 [2] Coriolis, “Théorie mathématique des effets du jeu de billard,” (1835); “Mathematical Theory of
     Spin, Friction, and Collision in the Game of Billiards”, English translation, by David Nadler, ISBN:
     0-9771671=0-0 (2005).

 [3] A. D. Moore, “Mechanics of Billiards, and Analysis of Willie Hoppe’s Stroke,” (1942).

 [4] R. Evan Wallace and Michael C. Schroeder, “Analysis of billiard ball collisions in two dimensions,”
     Am. J. Phys. 56, 815 (1988); doi:10.1119/1.15455 .

 [5] S. C. Crown, “Modeling the Effects of Velocity, Spin, Frictional Coefficient, and Impact Angle on
     Deflection Angle in Near-elastic Collisions of Phenolic Resin Spheres,”

 [6] Inhwan Han, “Dynamics in Carom and Three Cushion Billiards,” Journal of Mechanical Science and
     Technology 19, 976 (2005).

 [7] MATHAVAN, S., JACKSON, M.R. and PARKIN, R.M., “Application of high-speed imaging to
     determine the dynamics of billiards,” Am. J. Phys. 77 (9), 788 (2009). doi:10.1119/1.3157159.

 [8] MATHAVAN, S., JACKSON, M.R. and PARKIN, R.M., “A theoretical analysis of billiard ball
     dynamics under cushion impacts,” Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part C:
     Journal of Mechanical Engineering Science, 224 (9), pp.1863 - 1873 (2010).

                                                     18
 [9] T. Nierhoff, K. Heunisch and S. Hirche, ”Strategic play for a pool-playing robot,” 2012 IEEE Work-
    shop on Advanced Robotics and its Social Impacts (ARSO), Munich, Germany, 2012, pp. 72-78, doi:
    10.1109/ARSO.2012.6213402; T. Nierhoff, K. Leibrandt, T. Lorenz and S. Hirche, ”Robotic Billiards:
    Understanding Humans in Order to Counter Them,” in IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, 46, no.
    8, pp. 1889-1899, Aug. 2016, doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2015.2457404.

[10] D. Alciatore, TP2-1, https://billiards.colostate.edu/

[11] See, for example, <billiards.colostate.edu> and <www.sfbilliards.com/articles/BD-articles.html>.

[12] Ron Shepard, ”Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Cue Ball Squirt, But Were Afraid
    to Ask,” <www.sfbilliards.com/Shepard-squirt.pdf> or <billiards.colostate.edu>, (2001).

[13] R. Cross, “Cue and ball deflection (or “squirt”) in billiards”, Am. J. Phys. 76, 205 (2008); doi:
    10.1119/1.2825392 .

[14] R. Cross, “Grip-slip behavior of a bouncing ball”, American Journal of Physics, 70 (11), 1093, (2002);
    doi:10.1119/1.1507792.

[15] Stronge, W. (2018). Impact Mechanics (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
    doi:10.1017/9781139050227 .

[16] H.-C. Kim, “Motions of a billiard ball after a cue stroke,” New Physics: Sae Mulli, 72, 208 (2022).

[17] C. S. Peskin, ”Collision of Billiard balls in 3D with spin and friction”, (2020). Collision of Billiard
    Balls in 3D with Spin and Friction.pdf

                                                    19
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/come_for_the_donuts_stay_for_the_drills.pdf
title: Come For The Donuts Stay For The Drills
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Come for the Donuts, Stay for the Drills”                                    ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at drdavepoolinfo.com. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Over the years, many people have noticed and asked about all the white donuts on my pool table, so I
decided to explain them in a recent online video (NV L.106) and here. The short explanation is: I use the donuts
mostly for teaching, to quickly and accurately spot balls for drills. For the long answer, see the video and the
rest of this column. Even if you don’t like donuts, many useful drills, which apply to players at all levels from
beginner to advanced, are included to help you assess and improve important aspects of your game.

    The official name for a little white donut is: “self-adhesive hole-reinforcement label.” They can be found at
any office supply store or can be ordered online. They come on sheets or in boxed rolls, and the most common
brand is Avery. To mark a ball position you want to re-use, first tap down on the ball to make a small mark and
indentation on the cloth. Then carefully place the donut with the mark in the center. Then press it down with a
finger or fingernail. To place a ball on the donut, it helps to start with ball away from the donut and then roll it
toward you onto the donut. The ball settles perfectly into place every time. If you want to remove donuts later,
don't worry about them getting stuck or leaving residue on the cloth. They peel off easily and cleanly. Now, if
a donut is on the table for a long time, you will see a donut outline when you remove it since the cloth underneath
has remained cleaner than the surrounding cloth.

     Most of the donuts on my table are used for the Billiard University (BU) Playing Ability Exams. There are
six different exams to assess and improve your technique and skills. And they are designed to work well over
a wide range of playing abilities. Everything you need to learn about and try the exams can be found at
billiarduniversity.org/testing/exams/. Everything is free, and video demonstrations are included. The first
exam consists of a set of 8 drills that help you work on important fundamental skills. Many of the donuts on my
table support this exam. Donuts are not required, but they make the exams go much more quickly. The table
setup instructions on the website include a diagram showing where donuts for most of the exam drills are placed
(see Image 1). Note that many of the donuts are used by multiple drills, as indicated by the drill number labels.

                                 Image 1 BU Exam donut setup instructions

Billiards Digest                                       1                                               February 2025
     Most of the drills in BU Exam I are progressive drills, meaning they get more difficult when you do well, and
get easier when you do poorly. And other drills just test certain types of skill shots over a range of angles,
distances or ball positions. Drill 7 in BU Exam I is the classic Wagon Wheel Drill (see Image 2), used to test
cue ball (CB) direction control. With ball in hand for each shot, the goal is to pocket the ball in the side and
send the CB to each of the ten target balls on the rails. The first few shots are easy to judge for most people.
The 30° rule peace sign can be used to find the CB line that allows a simple roll shot. Just point your middle
finger to the object ball (OB) target, and the index finger gives you the required CB line. For the draw shots,
the 3-times-the-angle system can be helpful. Just visualize where you want the CB to head. Then bisect the
angle to the pocket. Then measure this angle to the other side. Detailed demonstrations for both systems are
included in the video.

                               Image 2 BU Exam I Drill F7 – Wagon Wheel Drill

     A line of donuts down the middle of the table are used to check student vision center alignment (see Image
3). Testing and finding your ideal head position in pool is very important. If a student’s aim is accurate, the cue
will be right over the donut and nameplate on the rail. But if a student’s head position is off, the aim will not be
straight, and I will clearly see that the cue is not centered. If a student’s aim is off, I have them position the cue
over the rail donut and move their head and shoulders side to side until they find the head position where the
line through the cue and balls looks accurate. This head position is called the “personal vision center.” To aim
accurately, it is important to always have your head in this position relative to every shot line. Again, see the
video for more details and demonstrations.

Billiards Digest                                        2                                                February 2025
                                          Image 3 Vision Center check

     Once I know for sure a student is seeing the line of a shot correctly, I then test the accuracy and consistency
of their stroke. A good drill for that is MoFUDAT, the Most Famous and Useful Drill of All Time. I use donuts
along a diamond line to position the CB and provide a follow-through check, and I use a golf tee on the end rail
to give the student something very clear to focus on (see Image 4). The goal is to hit the CB at the golf tee and
have the ball come straight back to the tip. MoFUDAT is very instructional. First, it helps me check a student’s
aim and cue alignment. The cue should be directly over the diamond on the rail. It also helps me to see if the
follow-through is straight. The cue should finish right over the donut. It also lets me know if the student tends
to have any unintentional sidespin or not. MoFUDAT also teaches the student to stay down and still after the
hit, until the CB comes back. If the aim is off in either direction, the CB will not hit the rail in front of the tee.
And if the tip is off-center left or right, the rebound angle off the rail clearly indicates this.

Billiards Digest                                        3                                                February 2025
                                                 Image 4 MoFUDAT

     Several other useful drills that use other donut positions on the table are discussed and demonstrated in
online video NV L.106, so be sure to watch the video. Better yet, give all the drills a try. I am hoping you came
to this column for the donuts but will stay for the useful drills. Drills build skills, so get to work.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV L.106 – Reasons for the DONUTS on Dr. Dave’s Table … AWESOME DRILLS for Players
   normal video
                       of All Levels!

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at drdavepoolinfo.com.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                         4                                               February 2025
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/computational_pool_an_or_optimization_point_of_view.pdf
title: Computational pool: an OR-optimization point of view
topics: strategy_rules_drills, robotics_and_computation
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
Computational pool: an OR-optimization point of view
                   Jean-Pierre Dussault, Jean-François Landry, Philippe Mahey

      To cite this version:
     Jean-Pierre Dussault, Jean-François Landry, Philippe Mahey. Computational pool: an OR-optimization point
     of view. Encyclopedia of Operations Research and Management Science, 2010. ⟨hal-01653443⟩

                                        HAL Id: hal-01653443
                              https://hal.science/hal-01653443v1
                                            Submitted on 1 Dec 2017

    HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive             L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est des-
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re-        tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
search documents, whether they are published or not.       tifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non, émanant
The documents may come from teaching and research          des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or pri-   français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
vate research centers.                                     privés.

                                              HAL Authorization
                      Computational pool:
                 an OR—optimization point of view
        Jean-Pierre Dussault, Jean-François Landry & Philippe Mahey
                                        April 25, 2010

                                            Abstract
         Computational and robotic pool has received increasing interest in the past few
     years. The challenges are important. In this survey, we focus on the computational
     aspect, but nevertheless acknowledge that the robotic aspect is both very important
     and very difficult.
         Computationally, one may roughly split the tasks into three main aspects: simu-
     lation of the physics, execution of the shots and planning of sequences of shots. We
     will discuss those aspects from an OR–optimization point of view. The planning aspect
     retains also the interest of the artificial intelligence community, and links between both
     approaches will be revealed.
         We will present the state of the art in this young research area, as well as the
     obstacles that remain before a computer–robotic system actually challenges a human
     champion.

    Keywords: Pool, Billiards, Snooker, Game, Simulation, Planning, Strategy, Optimiza-
tion, Artificial Intelligence

Introduction
The interest in computational pool is motivated by a variety of factors. The mechanics of
pool has long served as a focus of interest for physicists, an interest which has extended
naturally to the realm of computer simulation. Realistic and efficient simulators have led to
the proliferation of computer pool games. These games include significant computer graphics
components, often including human avatar competitors with unique personalities, as well as
an element of artificial intelligence to simulate strategic play. There are numerous one-person
games available, of various physical realism.
    Though in the context of this chapter the primary objective is the creation of a computer
pool player, we wish to extend our research beyond the scope of billiards. We hope that by
researching the best way of making a perfect player we can develop new AI approaches, and
possibly contribute to other problems of that nature.

                                                 1
    There have been three instances of pool Olympiads where rival computational pool player
competed. The competitions attracted participants from the artificial intelligence commu-
nity, a pool player representing a challenge for the agent approach. Yet, only 8-ball tourna-
ments were held, and the champions used a Monte Carlo search tree strategy [11, 12, 23, 6].
In this chapter, we develop a complementary approach based on OR techniques, simulation,
dynamic programming, numerical optimization.
    Although the problem we wish to solve is deterministic in nature, subject to the laws
of physics, it is so easily influenced by many small factors that it can actually be seen as
stochastic. This makes it very hard to create a perfect player, because even if he never
misses, the outcome of the game is never pre-defined.
    In this chapter we will explore the technical challenges of computational pool from an OR
point of view. Section 1 describes the elements of the cue sports from a human perspective,
including some discussion of the aspects of advanced human play. Section 2 introduces the
several OR aspects to be detailed later on.
    Section 3 presents the requirements to produce a simulation model. Section 4 addresses
the optimization of a billiards player. This is work in progress.
    Future trends are discussed in section 5.

1     The Cue Sports
There are many varieties of cue sport, and many different terminologies and rules that vary
with geographical location. For example, the most popular North American pool game is
8-ball, in which there are seven “low” (solid) balls (1–7), seven “high” (striped) balls (9–15)
and the 8-ball. The objective is to be the first to sink all balls in one group, and then
the 8-ball. Alternately, snooker is likely the most popular cue sport in England, which is
played on a larger table and consists of 15 red balls, and 6 of various colors. The balls are
smaller than their North American counterparts, and the objective is to accumulate points
by alternately sinking a red and then a colored ball, each having a certain value. In France,
a game called carom is played, where only 3 balls are used on a pocket-less table, and the
player must attempt to contact both object balls with the cue ball. In the three cushions
(“trois bandes” in french) version of carom, the cue ball is required to rebound off of three
rails before kissing the object ball.

1.1    Pool terminology
The basic elements common to all of these games are as follows. For a much more complete
glossary of cue sport terms, see the Wikipedia page [3] from which we extract the terms
relevant to our computational pool study.

    • Cue: Also cue stick. A stick, usually around 55-60” in length with a tip made of a
      material such as leather on the end and sometimes with a joint in the middle, which
      is used to propel billiard balls.

                                              2
• Cue Ball: Also cueball. The ball in nearly any cue sport, typically white in color, that
  a player strikes with a cue stick. Sometimes referred to as the ”white ball”, ”whitey”
  or ”the rock”.

• Object Ball: Depending on context:

    1. Any ball that may be legally struck by the cue ball (i.e., any ball-on);
    2. Any ball other than the cue ball.

• Table: The flat playing surface. The table size varies, depending on the game played,
  but is always rectangular, being twice as long as is is wide. In most games, the table
  has a pocket in each of the four corners, and one at the centers of each length.

    1. Bed: The table is covered in a textured felt (or baize) material, usually of green
       color, to add a frictional damping effect to the shots.
    2. Rail: A rubberized edge running along the inner boundary of the table, to accom-
       modate rebounds following the collision of a ball (cushions in British English).
    3. Table State: the position of all balls at rest on the table, ready for the next shot.

• Shot: The use of the cue to perform or attempt to perform a particular motion of
  balls on the table, such as to pocket (pot) an object ball, to achieve a successful carom
  (cannon), or to play a safety. Different classes of shot type include:

     – Direct Shot: A shot where the cue ball hits an object ball, which then reaches a
       pocket.
     – Kick Shot: A shot in which the cue ball is driven to one or more rails before
       reaching its intended target–usually an object ball. Often shortened to ’kick’.
     – Bank Shot: Shot in which an object ball is driven to one or more rails prior to
       being pocketed (or in some contexts, prior to reaching its intended target; not
       necessarily a pocket). Sometimes ”bank” is conflated to refer to kick shots as
       well, and in the UK it is often called a double.
     – Combination Shot: Also combination, combo. Any shot in which the cue ball
       contacts an object ball, which in turn hits one or more additional object balls
       (which in turn may hit yet further object balls) to send the last-hit object ball to
       an intended place, usually a pocket. In the UK this is often referred to as a plant.
     – Safety shot:
        1. An intentional defensive shot, the most common goal of which is to leave the
           opponent either no plausible shot at all, or at least a difficult one.
        2. A shot that is called aloud as part of a game’s rules; once invoked, a safety
           usually allows the player to pocket his or her own object ball without having
           to shoot again, for strategic purposes. In games such as seven-ball, in which
           any shot that does not result in a pocketed ball is a foul under some rules, a

                                           3
                called safety allows the player to miss without a foul resulting. A well-played
                safety may result in a snooker (no direct shot available).

   • Spin: Rotational motion applied to a ball, especially to the cue ball by the tip of the
     cue, although if the cue ball is itself rotating it will impart (opposite) spin (in a lesser
     amount) to a contacted object ball. Types of spin include follow or top spin, bottom
     or back spin (also known as draw or screw), and left and right side spin, all with widely
     differing and vital effects. Collectively they are often referred to in American English
     as ”English”.

1.2     Specificity of game variants
To excel in any pool variant, one has to thoroughly understand the physics, accurately control
the cue ball, and plan several shots in advance. However, each variant has its specificity, and
the relative weight of those game aspects slightly differs from one variant to another. We
examine here four among the most popular games and their specifics.

1.2.1   Games using numbered balls
On the American continent, most pool tables use numbered balls (1–15) in a variety of games.
The “official” tables measure 4.5′ × 9′ , but smaller models (4′ × 8′ or even 3.5′ × 7′ ) are quite
common. Hereafter, we briefly discuss three popular game variants using such equipment.

Eight ball This is by far the most popular game played on the American continent. How-
ever, some of its popularity stems from its use in bars, on coin operated tables, and the rules
of the game reflect this situation.
    It is the variant where chance plays a major role, and this for three main reasons:

   • no call is made on the break shot, so any ball pocketed by luck on the break is valid;

   • on a foul play, pocketed balls remain in the pockets;

   • both players do not play on the same set of balls.

Although not the primary variant in high level human competitions, this has been the variant
in the first three computational pool tournaments.
    Planning is limited to eight shots before the win. On the other hand, the presence of
opponent’s balls may complicate the plan.

Nine ball This variant is played with nine balls, and the specifics include the obligation
to hit the lowest numbered ball on the table. Thus, planning is somewhat simpler here since
the order in which the player attempts the balls is fixed.

                                                4
Straight pool This is played on similar tables as eight balls pool, but here, any ball has to
be called including on the break shot, and balls sunk on a foul are pulled out the pocket and
re-spotted on the table. Champions achieve runs of several hundreds consecutive successful
shots. It is clear that this variant requires both clever planning, and extreme accuracy. High
risk shots involving several rebounds on the rails or with other balls are rare, the players
often preferring to resort to defensive shots than to risk giving hand to the opponent with
an easy table.

1.2.2    Snooker
Snooker is the most popular variant in UK. It is played on a large (6′ × 12′ ) table using 15
red balls and six colored balls in addition to the cue ball. The large dimension of the table
and the use of slightly smaller balls call for high accuracy. Here again difficult bank, kick
or combination shots are often avoided by the frequent use of defensive shots. The name
snooker itself refers to the situation where a player has no legal direct shot available.

1.2.3    Carambol
Carom is played on a pocket-less table using only three balls, slightly larger than numbered
balls though. The game consists in having the cue ball hit the other two balls. In high
level competitions, the three cushions variant is often prefered, in which the cue ball has to
rebound on three cushions before hitting the second of the other two balls. Obviously, this
three cushions variant is extremely demanding in geometrical skills, and the sole difficulty
of a single shot almost precludes any form of planning.
    In opposition to most pocket billiards variants, the physics model of the collision with
the rail is of primary importance here, as is the accurate control of the cue ball. On the
other hand, the strategic planning aspect is way less important.

2       Overview of computational pool
In this section, we present the three basic building blocks used in a computational billiards
player. As we discussed in section 1.2, different variants of the game require different balance
and specificity in the building blocks.

2.1     Physics simulation
The simulator is required for two aspects in computational pool.

    • The first one is to act as a common table and referee in order for the (computer)
      players to compete. In an ideal world, the simulated game would be indistinguishable
      from its counterpart as played on a real table. This involves meticulous modeling of
      the impacts between the cue, the balls, the rails and (whenever balls jump) the table.
      Moreover, the rolling motion of the balls on the cloth must be addressed faithfully.

                                               5
    • The second aspect is a tool on which the AI players rely in order to predict the outcome
      of a given shot. Here, speed–accuracy trade-offs are expected.

Yet, in the first three editions of the computer pool tournaments, the same simulator was
used for both uses, some random noise being added on the shots played on the “common
table”. As the situation evolves, it is likely that referee simulators will get more and more
complex and faithful, yielding high computational costs perhaps no more compatible with
the requirements of computational players under limited resources. Ultimately, the games
will be played on a real table by robots, and the simulators used by the players will be
integral part of the player’s strategy.

2.2    Control of the cue ball
When observing a champion at some variant of pocket billiards, two aspects are striking:
the guy has mostly easy looking shots to play, but whenever he faces a difficult shot, he
nevertheless sinks the ball. The first aspect is less spectacular, but is a consequence of his
accurate repositioning after the impact on the object ball.

2.3    Strategic planning
Another aspect is that the champion takes enlightened decisions with respect to the order
in which he will sink the balls. In computational pool, this aspect is addressed using some
dynamic model of the game aspect.
    Among the most evident strategic decisions is the choice to do a so called defensive shot.
Instead of aiming to sink some object ball, the player strives to leave the cue ball in such a
position that his opponent is left with a very difficult situation.

3     Modeling billiards physics
In this section we first summarize the mathematical models that have been developed over
the years, going back to Coriolis in 1835. Next we discuss two computer implementations.

3.1    Mathematical models
All variants of billiards and pool games involve a cue, hard spheres, a bed which is a flat
surface covered with a cloth, and rail cushions. Spheres slide and roll on the bed, impact on
each other as well as on the rails, and the cue gives the initial impact to the cue ball. Thus,
we need to model

    • cue–cueball impacts;

    • moving balls; mostly, sliding and rolling on the bed, but sometimes “jumping” off the
      bed for some tiny amount of time, and even sometimes jumping off the table;

                                              6
   • collisions between moving hard spheres, mostly elastic collisions between rigid bodies;

   • collisions between hard spheres and cushions on the rails, partly inelastic collisions
     between a rigid body and a not so rigid one (the rail).

All of this is quite delicate to accurately simulate, but since the moving bodies are identical
spheres, and the bed is planar, the physics equations are rather simple.
    The interest in the mathematics of billiards goes back to at least Coriolis [9], and has
attracted recent interest as well. In particular, David G. Alciatore (Dr Dave), in addition
to his book [4], maintains a web site [5] where he posts more mathematically oriented devel-
opments including fine tuning of physical models required to accurately predict experiments
he conducts using high speed video cameras.

3.1.1   Rolling motion—2D simplifications
An important observation yields computationally tractable prediction for balls motion on the
table. The trajectory of the balls is described by a piecewise quadratic parametric equation.
This allows to simplify the collision detection to simultaneous quadratic equations, for which
closed form formulæ are available. [16, 18, 22]. Moreover, extension to 3D simulation still
may be described by piecewise parametric quadratic equations. Therefore, in principles, it is
possible to implement a discrete event simulator without using numerical integration. More-
over, since the underlying parametric equations are simple piecewise quadratic, an improved
implementation will provide sensitivities and derivatives, most useful for the optimization
aspects to be discussed in section 4.3.1.

3.1.2   Ball–ball collisions
Ball–ball collisions are almost rigid bodies perfectly frictionless elastic collisions. The behav-
ior of the object ball and cue ball after the collision are described by the so-called 30◦ and
90◦ rules. Actually, slight non-elasticity, small friction, speed, spin all slightly modify the
rules. In [5], one can find numerous technical notes providing fine points of billiards physics.

3.1.3   Ball–rail collisions
Those collisions are much more complicated. In most pocket billiards variant, though, kick
or bank shots are not that frequent, so a simple approach is justified. In three cushions, as
the name of the game suggests, those collisions are of prime importance. Larger balls used in
carom variants and high energy ball–rail collisions imply the cushion undergo important de-
formations, no more faithfully computed using simple geometric models alone. For instance,
in [1, 10], a one person carom game, shots were performed and captured with a camera, and
in the actual game, interpolation is used to simulate the player’s shots.

                                                7
3.2     Existing physically documented simulators
While there are many one–person pool playing games, there are few efforts disclosing the
actual equations or physical models underlying their simulator; we describe hereafter two
softwares available under open source licenses.

3.2.1   PoolFiz – FastFiz
The first three instances of the pool Olympiads used the PoolFiz simulator [16, 18, 17], lately
replaced by the re-implementation FastFiz [2]. This simulator implements the simplified
2D rolling equations; the present implementation neglects any spin in the e3 axis. The
simulator was made available through a common interface to the competitors, which used it
to compute their shots. When used as the referee table, some random noise was added to
the shot parameters.
    In the simulator, the following parameters describe a shot:

   • a and b representing the side-spin and top-spin with respect to the cue ball center;

   • θ the elevation of the queue stick;

   • φ the orientation of the queue stick on the table;

   • v, the initial speed given to the cue ball.

3.2.2   Billiards
The billiards–techne project [20] adopts a different approach, namely it uses the ODE open
source dynamics engine. As such, physical objects (cue, balls, table bed, table rails) are
described using the ODE interface, and simulated as accurately as ODE allows. No advantage
is taken from the simplified nature of perfect spheres rolling on a planar surface. While still
in progress, the physics has 3D realism, and care has been taken to validate the results
with high speed cameras observations to accurately model the cueball deflection when using
English, an aspect absent from PoolFiz. The approach using ODE has some drawback,
though: the simulator cannot produce noiseless results since it relies on .

3.2.3   Simulators comparison
We illustrate in Figure 1 the differences in repositioning possibilities of the two simulators.
Probably neither is realistic enough to predict reposition on a real table and further validation
is certainly required. Important differences come from the fact that PoolFiz does not take
side spin into account on ball–rail collisions, which explains the large area unattainable.
Billiards, as compared to PoolFiz, results in less influence of speed on the cue ball deflection
after impact with the object ball.

                                               8
Figure 1: Reachable regions. For a simple shot in the upper right corner, we observe the
reachable regions for Billiards (left) and PoolFiz (right).

4     Modeling billiards players
As discussed above, some kind of simulation of the physics is required for the computational
player to be able to predict the outcome of a given shot. In this section, we assume such a
simulation model is available in the form of a black box. The more accurate the simulator,
the more accurate predictions and planning of the AI player. In the first Olympiads, all the
players shared the same simulator, which also acted as table referee. When playing on a
robot, or when using a highly accurate simulator, it is expected that different players will
use different simulators for their planning.
    Two aspects mainly require our attention. A sequence of shots has to be established, and
thereafter, their execution has to be computed. By a shot, we mean a somewhat generalized
shot including repositioning of the cueball. In the following subsections, we first address the
planification of the sequence of shots as modeled by a dynamic programming (DP) formula-
tion. We also discuss some solution strategies for this admittedly abstract DP formulation.
Actual shots required by the dynamic programming planner are then computed using a local
optimization model. We cannot avoid the tentation to report on our preliminary experience
with respect to the local optimization.
    Before going on further, we must warn that the following modeling assumes the 8-ball
game setting. As the model is rather abstract, we expect no fundamental problem to extend
it to other pool variants, but of course several minute details will have to be adjusted for
other forms of the game.

4.1    A dynamic programming formulation
Modeling billiard games is a difficult task and very few known frameworks fit correctly the
specific characteristics of these games which are : continuous state and control spaces, actions
taken at discrete unknown instants, a specific turn-taking game rule which allows a player
to play several times as long as he keeps the hand, stochastic perturbations of moves. C.
Archibald et al. [8] have proposed a stochastic game framework valid for finite or repetitive
versions of the billiard games and they studied the existence of Nash equilibria associated

                                               9
with stationary Markov strategies. We will first focus on the stochastic control problem
mixing discrete and continuous aspects before introducing the game theoretic ingredients in
the model.
    Stochastic dynamic programming has been introduced to model dynamic discrete pro-
cesses where random events occur after decisions are applied at each stage of the process.
The state space X specifies the position of each ball on the table. It is here continuous but
may be discretized to locate balls on the table. The control space U corresponds to the
value of the cue parameters which are adjusted at the beginning of the shot. Each transition
is the result of a nonlinear constrained optimization problem which represents the dynamic
trajectory of the balls on the table under random perturbations. As seen below, one tries
here to minimize the distance of the cue ball to a specified location while maximizing the
probability to sink the object ball. The overall objective function is to maximize the reward
of the player which is positive when the object ball is sunk in the pocket. The way to model
that situation is to add a Boolean variable yt at each stage which is one when the object
ball is sunk. Observe that, when yt = 0, the hand is lost and the opponent will inherit
the current table. Thus, in difficult situations, a defensive step will try to minimize the
opponent’s reward. Note also that, as long as expectations are used in the stochastic case,
a value function can be estimated by backward calculations, starting at an ideal state to
pocket the last ball.
    Let π = (u0 , . . . , uT −1) be a feasible policy (series of actions for the states (s1 , . . . , sT )),
P [s′ | s, u] the probability of going from state s to state s′ while taking action u, R(s) the
reward for reaching state s. The stochastic program can be stated in the following way
(using here a finite length game) :

                                                                           P
         Maximize γP [yT = 1 |(u1 , . . . , uT −1; ω1 , . . . , ω T −1 )] + t E[Rt (st , yt , ωt )]
                      (st+1 , yt+1 ) = argmins(τ )∈X,ut ∈U E[F (st , ut , s(τ ), s̄t , ωt )]            (1)
                                              st ∈ X, yt ∈ {0, 1}

where ωt ∈ Ωt is a random variable with normal distribution and γ is an harmonization
factor. The transition step associated with the internal minimization sub-problem will be
detailed below. It relies on a target position for the cue ball corresponding to state s̄t . The
trajectory is represented by s(τ ) where τ ∈ [0, τf ] is the continuous time of the motion of
the balls, st = s(0), st+1 = s(τf ).
    Let now V π (s) be the optimal expectation of the final reward when applying the sub-
policy (ut , . . . , uT −1 ) from state st until the final state.
    The equation:                                   X
                                 V π (s) = R(s) + γ      P (s′ |s, π(s))V π (s′ )
                                                       s′

will be at its optimum if it satisfies the condition:
                                                 X
                       V ∗ (s) = R(s) + max γ        P (s′ |s, π(s))V ∗ (s′ )
                                                π(s)
                                                            s′

                                                       10
.
   Thus, the sub-policy π ∗ = {u∗t , u∗t+1 ..., u∗T −1} will be optimal for this problem.
   For billiards, as stated in [8], we are faced with a continuous-state and continuous-action
domain, which makes things a bit more complicated.
   We find ourselves evaluating an integral instead of a sum:
                                                     Z
                         V (s) = R(s) + max γ           P (s′|s, π(s))V (s′ )ds′
                                          π     s′

    The optimal strategy of discrete dynamic programs is commonly solved by performing
backward computations from the final state back to the current state. We will discuss that
strategy below, after saying a few words about the underlying game theoretic issues.

4.2    Game issues
Let us consider first the simpler situation of a finite game (like the 8-ball). It is not easy to
analyze the general strategy which interprets a defensive shot as the one which will leave a
difficult table to the adversary, thus expecting to take back the hand later to finish the game.
This means indeed that the final profit associated with P [yT = 1] is still valid. Nevertheless,
we should here pull from a possible table at stage t to an unknown table at t + q where q is
the number of estimated shots left to the opponent. We refer to Archibald et al [7] for an
interesting A.I. point of view of the strategic issues.

4.3    Solution strategies for the DP model
The general problem of finding V π (s) for a deterministic problem may be quite complex by
itself, and often becomes intractable as soon as more variables come into play. It is even
worst for a problem with a continuous state and action space. However, in our case, we
can benefit from the knowledge we have of the game we are solving and extract important
information to narrow our search to a limited number of action-state space combinations.
Assumption 1 : yt = 1, t = 1, . . . , T
    Assumption 1 corresponds to the so-called win-off-the-break winning sequence. The
optimal value is hence the expected sum of remaining rewards to get through the game.
The way to cope with the fact that the success of the game is now deterministic is to add a
technical reward to an easier shot, or, equivalently, to a better position for the cue ball on a
given table.
Assumption 2 : The cue and object balls are the only balls expected to move.
    With assumption 2, we get a direct estimate of the future positions of all future object
balls. The player strategy corresponds to the Optimistic Planner described in [7].
Observation : Later, we will naturally relax Assumption 2 to authorize collisions with other
balls (and with the rails). Then, a new question will arise : should we consider only side
collisions due to the trajectory of the cue and object balls, or should we include different
shots aiming at repositioning the cue ball so that a collision happens with another ball (or

                                               11
a cluster of dangerously close balls) ? That latter situation is now under study. The skill
model to compute the optimal trajectory of the balls will here be much more intricate as it
will involve elastic collisions and singularities (see [19]).
    Back to the stochastic dynamic program, assuming Assumptions 1 and 2, we will now
proceed backward to estimate the optimal value of a given table. We may start with the
last table which can be modeled as the current table where we want to sink, not the current
object ball, but the the one which should be sunk at the last shot. To compute all V π (sT −1 ),
we must compute the pocket angle for each remaining balls and then perform an inverse step
to position the cue ball in all feasible states at t = T − 1. The optimization black box will
be very useful as it already works with an estimate s̄t of the desired repositioning state.
Observation : The curse of dimensionality will probably make these computations cum-
bersome and time-consuming if T is large, but we can begin testing increasingly complex
situations setting T = 2, 3, . . . which can be easily adapted from the general case.

4.3.1   Optimization approach
We describe briefly here the minimization sub-problem associated with the transition step
at stage t as defined in model (1).
    Supposing we are using the black box simulator described earlier, with the action variable
ut being the finite-dimensional vector of the five parameters a, b, θ, φ and v. The trajectories
s(τ ) of the balls moving on the table at a given shot depend thus on the initial state s(0) = st
and on ut , the latter being perturbed by the random variable ωt .
    To compute an optimal action ut , we minimize a least-square function associated with
the desired reposition s̄t of the cue ball on the table, and with the desired sinking of the
object ball. The objective function can thus be modeled in the following way :

                       F (s(τ ), ut , ωt ) =         ks(τf ) − s̄t k2
                              subject to         s(τ ) = ψ(st , ut , ωt )
                                      y = 1 if sobj (τ ) = p̄ for τ ∈ [0, τf ]

where ψ is the dynamic transition function associated with the simulator, sobj is the com-
ponent of s associated with the object ball and p̄ is the component of s̄t associated with
the pocket. The solution of the minimization sub-problem will then give st+1 = s(τf ) with
the corresponding value of y updating yt+1 . In the stochastic case, the function is replaced
by an expectation value computed from the known distribution of the noise on the action
variables.
    The detailed formulation of the minimization problem and its resolution by an adaptation
of Powell’s derivative-free Quasi-Newton method (see [21]) can be found in [15].

4.3.2   Value of Billiards
In a general matter, the difficulty of executing a shot on a billiard table is defined by two
aspects; the distance between the cue-ball, object ball and pocket, as well as the angle at

                                                  12
Figure 2: Shot difficulty. The distance of the cue ball to the object ball, of the object ball
to the pocket, the cut angle and the angle with the pocket all influence the difficulty of a
shot, proportional to the admissible error with respect to the “perfect” shot that will sink
the object ball right in the center of the pocket.

which the cue-ball will hit the object ball. Of course, other factors also come into play like
other balls partially blocking the path, or the closeness of the cue-ball to the rails. However,
we can still get a pretty good estimate of a shot difficulty by using the first two aspects
described. A real and precise difficulty coefficient is almost impossible to compute since it
will not only rely on the percentage of success of the computed shot, but also on the impact
of this shot for the cue-ball repositioning.
    As shown in Figure 2, both the angle and distance factor result in a calculable angle θ
for the shot difficulty. A shot aimed at the center of this angle should normally result in the
best success percentage for this shot.
    Once we have computed this coefficient, we can use it to evaluate any given table state,
simply by taking the maximum value of all the available shots for a given cue ball position.
If we now divide our billiard table into a 50x100 grid, we can take the value of maxni=0 θi at
each of these points and come up with the best repositioning targets for the next shots by
removing each time the ball we would be aiming for (since we assume it will be pocketed).
    However, this first and seemingly logic evaluation of a billiard table state is not necessarily
applicable to all variants of the game, and does not for the moment take into account
defensive shots. It does however give a good estimation of a table state value.

4.3.3   Results
To show the efficiency of the optimization model discussed in this paper, we ran some tests
on randomly generated table states and computed possible shots using local and global
optimization libraries. We show here only two of the best performers we tested for the sake
of brevity. Both approaches were implemented using the NLopt library ([13]). BOBYQA,
a local optimization method by Powells [21] was tested with five different starting points,
distributed over the possible shot parameters. DIRECT-L, a global optimization method by
[14], was tested with only one starting point.
    Close to 20,000 various shots were computed using both libraries, to insure a proper
sample size. Each of these shots represents a combination of an object-ball, an aimed pocket,
a cue-ball and a repositioning target. As can be seen below, types of shots included direct,
kick, bank and combine shots.

                                                13
                   DIRECT-L             Success %   Avg. time    Avg. time succ. shots   Avg. Dist.
               Direct shots (4310)       97.21%      0.37 sec.         0.38 sec.          0.15m
                Kick shots (6950)        95.59%      0.78 sec.         0.78 sec.          0.19m
                Bank shots (7520)         72.0%      0.85 sec.         0.99 sec.          0.59m
             Combination shots (1150)    85.13%      2.02 sec.         2.09 sec.           0.4m

                   BOBYQA               Success %   Avg. time    Avg. time succ. shots   Avg. Dist.
               Direct shots (4310)       96.10%      0.08 sec.         0.07 sec.          0.34m
                Kick shots (6950)        88.21%      0.13 sec.         0.12 sec.          0.43m
                Bank shots (7520)        35.45%      0.12 sec.         0.16 sec.          0.68m
             Combination shots (1150)    46.00%      0.31 sec.         0.34 sec.          0.62m

Table 1: Results of 19930 different shots computed with the local optimization method
BOBYQA and global optimization method DIRECT-L. Average times(seconds) are dis-
played for all shots, as well as for successful shots. The average distance (meters) is the
distance from the repositioning target.

    The local optimization method, even though launched five times with various starting
points, gets a slightly lower success percentage for bank and combine shots. The DIRECT-L,
however, being a more global approach, achieves better results but at a higher cost in calls to
the simulator. What these results actually show us is that we can obtain satisfying results to
compute single shots with very few calculations. The trade-off between the solution’s quality
and the computation time needs to be carefully studied to achieve the best compromise, but
this will also vary with respect to the variant of game played. It should also be noted that
in the case a solution is not found for a given shot, it is usually because it is not possible
because of other balls or rails restricting the queue motion. Thus a global method may be
able to find a solution by doing a spectacular shot, but one that is not very reliable when
played on a stochastic system. Further testing is needed to adapt the search criteria to the
type of game played, and the level of noise present in the simulator.

5     Perspective
We proposed a description of a new application field, computational billiard. The field is
really emerging, and much is to be expected in some near future. However, the ultimate
goal to have a computer robot challenge human champions appears quite remote. We did
not discuss the robotic aspect of this challenge, but it should be clear that good progress
has been made on the computational aspect, and that much remains to be done in this, once
again, new field.
    From an OR specific point of view, we have described a stochastic dynamic programming
framework to model an optimal strategy of a generic billiard player in the presence of noise.
The key contribution is an improved estimation of the table value at some stage that takes
in consideration the expectation of the difficulty to complete a sequence of winning shots
and not only the current one. The present modeling is coherent with the conclusions of
Archibald et al [7] who state that ’strategic skill’ is decisive whenever ’the execution skill’ is

                                                     14
imperfect.
    On the other hand, we have presented an improved player simulator based on an accurate
optimization tool to drive the cue ball trajectory towards the desired spot with the ’best’
table value. Numerical simulations on repeated launching of 8-ball games were performed
with relative success, including indirect shots like bank and combine shots, confirming the
robustness of our player.
    Current work aims at improving the player skill to cope with more realistic situations
including the precise modeling of elastic collisions with banks and the breaking of clusters
of balls.
    Finally, the introduction of defensive strategies to take in consideration the game theoret-
ical aspects will be the direction of further studies. It is indeed evident that the development
of future competitions between virtual players controlling robots acting on a real table will
progressively increase the level of noise effects, thus turning more crucial the improvement
of the ’strategic skill’ of the players.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to François Gaumond and Benoit Hamelin for their careful reading of the
manuscript and useful comments and François Gaumond’s work on the Billiards–PoolFiz
interface.

References
 [1] Classic billard. Canal + multimédia.

 [2] FastFiz. http://www.stanford.edu/group/billiards/FastFiz-0.1.tar.gz.

 [3] Glossary of cue sports terms. WWW Wikipedia.

 [4] David Alciatore. The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards. Sterling, 2004.

 [5] David      G.     Alciatore.          Pool      and     billiards    physics    resources.
     http://billiards.colostate.edu/physics.

 [6] Christopher Archibald, Alon Altman, and Yoav Shoham. Analysis of a winning com-
     putational billiards player. In IJCAI’09: Proceedings of the 21st international joint
     conference on Artifical intelligence, pages 1377–1382, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2009.
     Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.

 [7] Christopher Archibald, Alon Altman, and Yoav Shoham. Success, strategy and skill : an
     experimental study. In Proc. of 9th Int. Conf. on Autonomous Agents and Multiagents
     Systems (AAMAS 2010), Toronto, 2010.

                                              15
 [8] Christopher Archibald and Yoav Shoham. Modelling billiards games. In Sierra Decker,
     Sichman and Castelfranchi, editors, Proc. of 8th Int. Conf. on Autonomous Agents and
     Multiagents Systems (AAMAS 2009), Budapest, 2009.

 [9] Gaspard-Gustave Coriolis. Théorie mathématique des effets du jeu de billard. J. Gabay,
     Paris, France, 1835.

[10] Jean-Michel Fray. Private communication.

[11] Michael Greenspan. UofA wins the pool tournament. Intl. Comp. Gaming Ass. Journal,
     28(3):191–193, Sept. 2005.

[12] Michael Greenspan. PickPocket wins pool tournament. Intl. Comp. Gaming Ass. Jour-
     nal, 29(3):153–156, Sept. 2006.

[13] Steven G. Johnson.        The NLopt nonlinear-optimization package.          http://ab-
     initio.mit.edu/nlopt, 2010.

[14] D. R. Jones, C. D. Perttunen, and B. E. Stuckman. Lipschitzian optimization without
     the lipschitz constant. Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications, 1993.

[15] Jean-François Landry and Jean-Pierre Dussault. AI optimization of a billiard player.
     Journal of Intelligent and Robotic Systems, 50(4):399–417, dec 2007.

[16] Will Leckie and Michael Greenspan. Pool physics simulation by event prediction 1:
     Motion transitions. Intl. Comp. Gaming Ass. Journal, 28(4):214–222, Dec. 2005.

[17] Will Leckie and Michael Greenspan. An event-based pool physics simulator. 11th Ad-
     vances in Computer Games: Lecture Notes on Computer Science, (4250):247–262, 2006.

[18] Will Leckie and Michael Greenspan. Pool physics simulation by event prediction 2:
     Collisions. Intl. Comp. Gaming Ass. Journal, 29(1):24–31, Mar. 2006.

[19] B. M. Miller and J. Bentsman. Optimal control problems in hybrid systems with active
     singularities. Nonlinear Analysis, 65:999–1017, 2006.

[20] Dimitris Papavasiliou. Billiards. http://www.nongnu.org/billiards.

[21] Michael James David Powell. The BOBYQA algorithm for bound constrained opti-
     mization without derivatives. Technical report, Department of Applied Mathematics
     and Theoretical Physics, Cambridge England, 2009.

[22] David Sénéchal. Mouvement d’une boule de billard entre les collisions. Unpublished
     manuscript, 1999.

[23] Michael Smith. PickPocket: A computer billiards shark. Artif. Intell., 171(16-17):1069–
     1091, 2007.

                                             16
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/corey_deuel_s_famous_draw_shot.pdf
title: Corey Deuel S Famous Draw Shot
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
“Corey Deuel’s Famous Draw Shot”                                          ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     There are a few famous shots that live forever in the memories of pool fans. One such shot is Corey
Deuel’s famous power-draw shot against Mika Immonem at the 2004 US Open. Anyone who saw the shot
live, on ESPN, or via YouTube will know what shot I am talking about. If you don’t remember the shot, or
never saw it, you can view it online at: https://youtu.be/VVDrZK6VpuU. The shot is also illustrated in
Diagram 1 (see the black ball path). If you are a die-hard pool fan, you probably recognize the ball layout
and remember the shot. Corey was shooting the 4-ball up table, needing to get shape on the 5 down table.
This type of shot is possible only with an awesome power-draw stroke like Corey’s. It also requires really
slick and fast conditions like the new Simonis 760 cloth under bright TV lights that Corey faced. Both Corey
and the announcers were a little surprised by the action of the shot. In a later interviews, Corey implied that
he didn’t expect to get quite that amount of draw or have it be delayed that much. He was probably expecting
something more like the red path in Diagram 1. Notice that slight outside (right) spin is used to help send the
cue ball (CB) more down table off the first cushion.

                                   Diagram 1 Corey’s famous draw shot

    Recently, I acquired a new pool table (a 9’ Olhaussen, which I purchased from Robert Byrne) to replace
the 8’ Connelly I have used for years to produce all of my instructional videos. I got new Simonis 860HR cloth
installed really tight, resulting in conditions much slicker and faster than my previous table. The new
conditions inspired me to give Corey’s shot a try. My best attempt, which is very similar to the red path shown
in Diagram 1, is shown in online video NV H.6. I’ll be honest and admit that I didn’t succeed on the first
attempt like Corey. Also, I didn’t get quite as much backspin as Corey, and the draw action on Corey’s shot
was delayed more than with my shot, partly because my table conditions are not quite as slick and fast as the
Simonis-760 TV table on which Corey was playing.

Billiards Digest                                                                                 December, 2016
     After discovering how difficult this shot was, I wondered why Corey chose the power-draw option when
other options were clearly available. The best answer I could come up with is that he just wanted to show off
on the slick and fast conditions of the TV table. Maybe ESPN offered him extra cash if he pulled off some
impressive crowd-pleasing shots. I’m just kidding. Corey probably chose the shot because he knew he could
pull it off with realistic confidence in his ability. However, his choice would probably not have been the best
option for most players.

    Diagram 2 shows two of many possible shot alternatives demonstrated in NV H.6. The path shown in
black is a fairly natural option using outside (right) english to go off two rails. The red path shows another
good option if you are comfortable with inside english and you are playing on fast cloth and with cushions that
react to the english without killing the CB too much. The inside (left) english shot was fairly easy for me to
execute compared to Corey’s shot. To see additional shot options, watch NV H.6 online. Which shot option
would you choose? Would you go for Corey’s shot? Try all of the options like I did. It’s good practice.

                                Diagram 2 Two alternatives to Corey’s shot

     If you watch the Youtube video of Corey’s shot (https://youtu.be/VVDrZK6VpuU), you will see that Corey
got into the 4-ball-shot position by mistake after fluking in the previous 3-ball shot on an attempted kick safety.
And if you saw the entire original match, you will also know that Corey dogged an easy shot at the 9-ball, and
lost the game. He probably had too much adrenaline flowing after executing such an amazing draw shot on
the 4. The whole sequence demonstrates that even top pros like Corey are human, even if they do execute
seemingly super-human shots at times.

      The next time you’re at a table, give Corey’s shot a try. If you want to come even close to pulling it off,
you will need to find really slick and fast conditions (e.g., new Simonis 760 cloth in hot and dry conditions)
and/or polish-up or Silicone-spray the CB to simulate the conditions Corey faced. With slick conditions, very
little backspin is lost on the way to the object ball, and draw curve is delayed more, as with Corey’s shot. You
can make the shot a little easier by putting the CB closer to the 4 like I demonstrate at the end of NV H.6.
Regardless, it is important to have good technique and a strong draw stroke. For advice on how to improve
your power draw shots, see the “power draw” resource page in the “draw shot” FAQ section at
billiards.colostate.edu. Have fun with your attempts at Corey’s shot! I think you will appreciate even more
what Corey did after you give it a go yourself.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    December, 2016
Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV H.6 – Corey Deuel's famous draw shot analyzed by Dr. Dave
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-
author of the Video Encyclopedias of “Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Pool Practice (VEPP),” and “Eight
Ball (VEEB),” and the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS)” and “Billiard University (BU)”
instructional DVD series, all available at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    December, 2016
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/coriolis_was_brilliant_but_he_didn_t_have_a_high_speed_camera_part_i_introduction.pdf
title: Coriolis was brilliant ... but he didn't have a high-speed camera
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                         ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Coriolis was brilliant ... but he didn’t have a high-speed camera –
Part I: Introduction”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV 4.20) help you locate the resources on the
website. You might also want to view the resources from a CD-ROM. See the website for more
details.

     After writing twelve articles on the 90° and 30° rules, I’ve decided to move on to a new topic.
For the next few articles, I will be summarizing and discussing results from a little known but
amazing book on the physics of pool. The book’s title is Theorie mathematique des effets du jeu
de billard (“Mathematical Theory of the Game of Billiards”). It was written by the late, great
Gaspard Gustave de Coriolis in 1835. Coriolis was a brilliant mathematician and physicist who is
credited with discovering the “Coriolis” force. This is the force that causes hurricanes and
tornadoes to turn counterclockwise in the northern hemisphere. It is also the cause of significant
loads in the bearings of engines in moving vehicles (cars, planes, boats). Coriolis’ billiards book
is THE BIBLE of pool physics! It covers pretty much every important pool physics relation that
has ever been presented since. Unfortunately, it is not very widely read because it was written in
French, and most of us can’t read that silly language. The book was never translated to and
distributed in English. Also, Coriolis’ mathematics and complicated illustrations are difficult to
follow by today’s standards.

    Fortunately, David Nadler, a cue sports enthusiast who got a PhD in mathematics from
Berkeyley in 1979, has recently been working on an English translation. The translation is not
available yet – it is due out later this year. It will be announced on the Billiard Digest CCB online
discussion forum when it comes out. Several months ago, David asked me to review his working
draft. I was very happy to oblige because I’ve been really looking forward to reading Coriolis’
work. When I read the entire work, I was totally amazed by how much he had done so long ago
(1835!). Coriolis had analyzed practically every interesting pool physics problem there is to
analyze ... and leather tips had just recently been invented (by Mingaud, another Frenchman, in
1807).

    Coriolis was a brilliant mathematician and physicists, and it is amazing how much he was
able to do with pool physics, given how busy he was with other things. However, as I will show in
some follow-up articles, not all of Coriolis’ conclusions are totally valid because some of his
assumptions about how the cue stick, tip, and table cloth respond are not totally accurate. If he
had the luxury of a high-speed camera, he would have known about some of these inaccuracies.
On the other hand, it is probably good that Coriolis did not have a high-speed camera. If he did,
he may not have been as prolific with his work, because he probably would have spent endless
hours entertaining himself, colleagues, and students by using the camera for silly things. Believe
me ... I know from experience. It is difficult to resist this urge once one sees the creative potential
of high-speed videography. On the other hand, if Coriolis had computers in his day (and he
would have if he had a high-speed camera), he probably would have gotten a lot more work
done. For his pool book, he painstakingly spent days and weeks figuring out conclusions and
constructing drawings using (now antiquated) geometric reasoning and analysis. Much of his
analysis and illustration work can now be done in a few hours with modern computers and
software tools. Anyway, I digress ... now back to his results.

   In the remainder of this first article, I will summarize some of the more important and useful
conclusions in his book. In future articles, I will summarize some of the interesting things I have
learned recently using high-speed videography. I will show how the video results relate to some
of Coriolis’ conclusions. Then I will look at some of his conclusions in more detail and provide
illustrations and advice that might be of interest to people who don’t care that much about all of
the math and physics.

   Here’s a brief summary of some of Coriolis’ conclusions, which he backed up with theoretical
(math and physics) and limited experimental studies:

               1. The curved path followed by a cue ball after impact with an object ball, due to
                  draw or follow, is always parabolic. As shown in Diagram 1, the path is parabolic
                  whether draw or follow is used. The shape of the parabola varies with shot speed
                  (see my March ’05 article for more information). NV 4.20 and 4.21 show examples of
                  cue ball paths for typical draw and follow shots. TP A.4 presents a modern math and
                  physics analysis along with a variety of example paths.

                      NV 4.20 – Delay of follow and tangent-line deviation with higher speed
normal video
                      NV 4.21 – Delay of draw and tangent-line deviation with higher speed

                      TP A.4 − Post-impact cue ball trajectory for any cut angle, speed, and spin
technical proof

                                                                   tangent
                                                    parabolic        line
                                      fast           cue ball
                                      medium          paths
                                      slow

                                                                              fast
                                                                              medium
                                                                              slow

                                                                aiming line
                                               impact
                                                 line

                                     Diagram 1 Parabolic cue ball paths

               2. To achieve maximum English, the point of contact of the cue tip with the cue
                  ball should be half a ball radius off center. See Diagram 2 for an illustration. For
                  a pool ball (D = 2 1/4 inches, R = 1 1/8 inches), the contact point should be off center
                  by 9/16 of an inch. It just so happens that the radius of the red circle on an Elephant
                  Practice cue ball (this is the cue ball used in all of my NV video demonstrations)
                  happens to be exactly 9/16”. The reason for this is that hitting the cue ball with larger
                  offsets can often lead to miscues.
                                         contact
                                          point

                                                    R

                                                  0.5R
                                                               maximum
                                                                English

              Diagram 2 Contact point offset for maximum English

  3. With a massé shot, the final path of the cue ball will be in a direction parallel to
     the line drawn between the initial base point of the cue ball and the aiming
     point on the table. This technique is briefly described in Byrne’s “Advanced
     Technique in Pool and Billiards” (on page 49). (In fact, an illustration of the method
     appears on the cover of that book.) Diagram 3 illustrates how the method is applied.
     The final direction of the cue ball path is along line RA, which connects the original
     cue ball resting point (point R) to the aiming point on the cloth (point A). Using the
     letters shown in the diagram, with “B” indicating the cue ball contact point, the
     Coriolis massé aiming system can be referred to as the “BAR” method (“B” for ball,
     “A” for aim, and “R” for resting point).

                            aiming
                              line

      contact point                                                          curved
     on the cue ball             resting point                               cue ball
           (B)                  of the cue ball                               path
                                 on the table                   fast

                                      (R)                       medium
  aiming point                                                  slow

on the table cloth
       (A)                                                                 A R
                                                                            B
                                                        theoretical
                                                      final direction
                        side view
                                                        of cue ball
                                                    (in RA direction)

                                                                        top view

             Diagram 3 Coriolis’ (“BAR”) massé shot aiming method

  4. For a cue ball with natural roll, the largest deflection angle the cue ball can
     experience after impact with an object ball is 33.7°, which occurs at a cut angle
     of 28.1°. This is very close to a half-ball hit. See my April ’04 article for various
     illustrations relating to a half-ball hit and the 30° rule. For examples of application of
     the 30° rule and a half-ball hit, see NV 3.8 through 3.10. See TP 3.3 and TP A.4 for
     a modern derivation and presentation of the detailed results.
                      TP 3.3 − 30° rule
technical proof       TP A.4 - Post-impact cue ball trajectory for any cut angle, speed, and spin

                      NV 3.8 – Using your hand to visualize the 30° rule
                      NV 3.9 – 30° rule example
normal video          NV 3.10 – Using the 30° rule to check for and prevent a scratch

    Again, I will look at each of these conclusions in more detail in future articles. I will also
discuss when and why these conclusions apply and when they don’t. My purpose for this article
was just to list the conclusion all in one place for people that haven’t had the benefit of seeing
Coriois’ work. I’ll continue the series next month by describing some of the high-speed
photography and its place in helping to verify some of Coriolis’ conclusions.

Good luck with your game, and practice hard,
Dr. Dave

PS:
               •   If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can
                   access them online at billiards.colostate.edu.
               •   If you are interested in the physics of pool, you might want to check out the new
                   “Pool/Billiards Physics Resources” section of my website. It lists and provides links
                   to many general interest and technical books and articles that explore the world of
                   pool physics.
               •   All of my high-speed camera footage to date can be viewed under the “High-speed
                   Video (HSV) Clips” section of my website. I also have a huge collection of non pool
                   (and sometimes silly) clips available for viewing at:
                                        high_speed_video.colostate.edu
                   There, you can find everything from the breaking, smashing, and bouncing of stuff to
                   various stupid human and animal tricks. Enjoy!

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” (2004, Sterling
Publishing).
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/coriolis_was_brilliant_but_he_didn_t_have_a_high_speed_camera_part_ii_high_speed_video.pdf
title: Coriolis was brilliant ... but he didn't have a high-speed camera
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                        ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Coriolis was brilliant ... but he didn’t have a high-speed camera –
Part II: High-speed video”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV A.76) help you locate the resources on the
website.

     This is the second article in a series I am writing about the pool physics book written by the
famous mathematician and physicists Coriolis in 1835. In last month’s article, I summarized and
illustrated some of the main conclusions in the book. In this article, I want to describe some high-
speed camera work I’ve done and show some examples that relate to some of Coriolis’
conclusions. Over the next few months, I will look at Coriolis’ conclusions in more detail and
explain when they do and don’t apply.

     Before I look at some of my high-speed video results, I want to acknowledge the work others
have done. In 1998, Bob Jewett, Mike Shamos, and others did some high-speed filming of
various shots. They called their project the “Jacksonville Experiments.” They summarized their
work in the 1999 April and June issues of Billiards Digest (see the link under the “videos” section
in the “Online Threads” area of my website for more information). Some of the conclusions they
arrived at in their work include:

     1. During impact, the cue tip is in contact with the cue ball only for about 0.001 second (a
        thousandth of a second). This is the case for most shots, regardless of the speed,
        English offset, or type of grip and follow-through.

     2. With an off-center hit, the cue stick deflects away from the cue ball substantially.

     3. During miscues, the cue stick often hits the cue ball multiple times.

I have verified these and other conclusions with my own high-speed video testing. For the 1st
conclusion, see almost any of the HSV clips on my website. For the 2nd conclusion, see HSV
4.4-4.5, A.5-A.7, A.13-A.28, and A.35-A.54. And for the 3rd conclusion, see HSV 2.1, A.1, A.13-
A.15, A.17, A.43-A.45, A.54, and A.61. I will summarize other conclusions from my work in a
future article.

     Another group that has done some very impressive high-speed video work is Robert Leitner
and three-cushion champion Andreas Efler out of Austria (see the link under the “videos” section
in the “Online Threads” area of my website for more information). Bob Jewett showed some still
images from their work in the May, 2005 issue of Billiards Digest. The high frame-rate, high-
resolution, full-color images the Austrian group creates with their extremely expensive camera are
very impressive. You can check out samples of their video footage at HSV A.76.

                   HSV A.76 - Austrian high-speed and infrared video clips
high-speed video

    Diagram 1 shows the equipment I use to film my high-speed video clips. I use a Kodak
Motion Corder Analyzer PS-110. I teach a course at Colorado State University dealing with
dynamics of machinery, and we normally use the camera to film high-speed machines to visualize
and quantify complex motion and vibrations. Fortunately, when the camera is not being used for
laboratory classes, I can borrow it to shoot pool stuff in my basement at home. The camera has a
maximum frame rate of 10,000 frames per second! This is much faster than typical consumer
video cameras that run at only 30 frames per second. I usually run the camera at 1,000 or 3,000
frames per second because that is fast enough to visualize most pool shots and because the
resolution (number of pixels) is better at the slower speeds (i.e., the pictures are more clear).
Another critical piece of equipment is a high-intensity lamp (e.g., 1200 Watts). The high frame-
rate doesn’t give the camera sensors much time to record, so the objects being viewed must be
bright. The one downside of such intense lighting is that it can cause “sun” burn, melt the hair on
your hand and arm, and periodically cause the finished wood on the rail to smoke. I know these
things from experience, but they are small prices to pay for science. For more information on
how I edit, store, and post videos online, see the “video” links under the “Online Threads” area of
my website.

            Diagram 1 Dr. Dave’s high-speed video equipment and typical setup

      Diagrams 2 and 3 show stills from two example high-speed video clips that relate to Coriolis’
conclusions (see last month’s article). Here, I just want to show the clips (or stills from the clips)
and make some observations. I’ll discuss the ramifications in future articles. Diagram 2 shows a
follow shot with large offset and fast speed. The full clip can be viewed online at HSV A.49. To
see other shots with different speeds and types of English, see HSV 4.4-4.5, A.5-A.7, A.13-A.28,
and A.35-A.54. For the shot in Diagram 2, the cue tip is in contact with the ball only between the
2nd and 3rd stills. The “3000FPS” at the bottom-right portion of the still indicates that the clip was
filmed at 3000 frames per second. The elapsed time (being counted down) is shown on the 2nd
line at the top-right of the still. The time changes only by 0.001 second between the 2nd and 3rd
still. The duration from the 1st to the last (6th) still is 0.0127 second (a little more than a
hundredth of a second). Note how much the cue stick deflects up as a result of the impact with
the ball. This is evidence that there is a vertical force (perpendicular to the impact line) between
the cue tip and ball during impact. This force, which causes the cue stick to deflect and vibrate
(see HSV 4.4), is the same force that causes the object ball to deflect (“squirt”) with side English
shots. The force is related to how much end mass the cue stick has. Low squirt cues like the
Predator have low end-masses to limit squirt. For more information on squirt and end mass, see
the “English deflection (squirt)” links in the “Online Discussion” section of my website.
                   Diagram 2 Close-up of cue tip impact during a large-offset follow shot

                       HSV A.49 – Follow shot with large offset, light grip, good follow-through, and fast
                       speed
high-speed video
                       HSV 4.4 - Deflection (squirt) due to high-speed English

     Diagram 3 shows stills from a good-action massé shot. You can view the entire clip online at
HSV A.60. Unlike with most shots, the cue tip stays in contact with the cue ball over a much
larger duration because the cue stick is driving the cue ball into the table (and the table pushes
back, like any self-respecting table would). For this particular shot, the cue tip is in contact with
the cue ball starting in the 2nd still and ending approximately with the 3rd still. This corresponds
to about 0.004 second (4 thousands of a second), which is four times longer than with most
shots. Also note how much the cue stick deflects laterally (to the left) while it is in contact with the
ball. The ball is mostly staying in place, picking up spin, during the cue tip contact. I hope you
view the clips online, because looking at the stills really doesn’t do the clips justice.
                                       Diagram 3 Massé shot

                   HSV A.60 – Masse draw shot with firm follow-through and good action
high-speed video

    All of my high-speed camera footage to date can be viewed under the HSV section of my
website. I also have a huge collection of non pool (and sometimes silly) clips available for
viewing at:
                             www.engr.colostate.edu/~dga/high_speed_video/

There, you can find almost everything imaginable including shooting a shaken pop can with a
pellet gun, dropping a cube of Jello, puncturing water balloons, and dropping an egg on a rat trip.
You can even see the performance of various stupid human and animal tricks ... all in super slow
motion for your viewing pleasure. Enjoy! Diagram 4 shows one of my favorite clips, which
shows my dog “Girl” fetching a bone off her nose. (I know ... I’m not very creative with my pet
names. By the way my cat’s name is “Kitty.”) “Girl” was always a willing subject for high-speed
video science as long as there were treats involved. I have included this clip here partly in tribute
to “Girl” who passed away recently, but also to make a point concerning many sports, including
pool. You can view the clip online by clicking on the link at the bottom of the “High-Speed Video”
section of my website. Click on “dog bone catch” in “Dr. Dave’s Hall of Fame.” When Girl
performs this trick, she moves so fast that the bone remains almost motionless in midair (because
gravity is so slow compared to dog) while she moves her head around to have the bone end up in
her mouth. Pretty impressive, don’t you think? In case you still haven’t figured out what point I’m
trying to make with this clip concerning pool, here it is: “Keep you eye on the bone.” Notice how
in the 1st and 2nd stills, her gaze is fixed on the bone. Only after the bone is safely in her mouth
in the 3rd still does she relax her gaze. This should serve as inspiration and as an example for
athletes in many sports where there is a ball involved. In pool, the message should be: “Keep
you eye on the object ball during your final stroke, and don’t move your gaze (or anything else
except the cue stick) until after impact (or well after).”

                          Diagram 4 Dog fetching bone off her nose

    I hope you are enjoying my series of articles about high-speed video and the work of Coriolis.
In future articles, I will try to use some high-speed video results to help explain how and why
some of Coriolis’ conclusions (see last month’s article) may or may not be valid in different
situations. I will also show how some of Coriolis’ conclusions might be useful in your game.

Good luck with your game, and practice hard,
Dr. Dave

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” (2004, Sterling
Publishing).
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/coriolis_was_brilliant_but_he_didn_t_have_a_high_speed_camera_part_iii_cue_ball_paths_are_like_satellite_dishes.pdf
title: Coriolis was brilliant ... but he didn't have a high-speed camera
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                         ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Coriolis was brilliant ... but he didn’t have a high-speed camera –
Part III: Cue Ball Paths are Like Satellite Dishes”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV 4.20) help you locate the resources on the
website.

    This is the third article in a series I am writing about the pool physics book written by the
famous mathematician and physicists Coriolis in 1835. In last month’s article, I described some
high-speed camera work I’ve done and showed some examples that relate to some of Coriolis’
conclusions. Over the next few months, I will look at Coriolis’ conclusions in more detail and
explain when they do and don’t apply. As with all of my past articles, my July ’05 article
summarizing Coriolis’ conclusions can be viewed on my website.

    Principle 23 summarizes one of Coriolis’ conclusions, which states that the cue ball’s path
curves in the shape of a parabola after hitting an object ball with follow or draw (see Diagram 1).
Interestingly, a parabolic curve is the same shape used to make radio telescopes, satellite TV
dishes, and headlight mirrors. As with all of Coriolis’ work, he backed up all of his results with
rigorous physics and mathematical analysis. For the sadistic readers out there with math and
physics backgrounds, you can check out the nitty-gritty details of Principle 23 at TP A.4. There I
present and illustrate the derivation with modern terminology and techniques and show plots of
example results.

                                               fast
                                                                  tangent
                                               medium
                                                                    line
                   straight-line               slow

                   motion with
                   natural roll

                      the cue ball
                     stops skidding
                    and starts rolling
                                                                            fast
                                                                            medium
                           parabolic                                        slow
                            cue ball
                             path
                                                                   aiming line

                                                             impact line
                                                        (the line of centers)

                              Diagram 1 Parabolic cue ball paths
Principle 23 Parabolic Cue Ball Paths

The curved path followed by a cue ball after impact with an object ball, due to draw or
follow, is always parabolic (see Diagram 1).

•     The shape of the parabola depends on shot speed (see Diagram 2 and Diagram 3).
•     For a stun shot, the path is a perfect straight line.

                        TP A.4 − Post-impact cue ball trajectory for any cut angle, speed, and spin
technical proof

     As you can see in Diagram 1, the cue ball path is parabolic for both follow and draw shots
(see NV 4.20 and NV 4.21 for demonstrations). The only time it is not parabolic is for a stun shot,
where the cue ball is sliding at impact without bottom spin or topspin. With a stun shot, the cue
ball heads in a straight line exactly along the tangent line, as predicted by the 90° rule (see my
January ’04 article). As indicated by the small blue boxes in Diagram 1, the cue ball path is
curved only for as long as the ball is skidding (i.e., not “rolling without slipping”). At some point
(indicated by the blue boxes), the skidding has changed the cue ball’s spin enough to create
natural roll. At this point, the cue ball starts rolling in a straight-line path, tangent to the end of the
curved parabolic path (until it hits a cushion or stops).

                        NV 4.20 – Delay of follow and tangent-line deviation with higher speed
normal video
                        NV 4.21 – Delay of draw and tangent-line deviation with higher speed

    The shape of the parabolic path and the point where skidding converts to natural roll varies
with shot speed. I actually covered this already in my March ’05 article, but I wanted to provide
more information here. Also, the illustrations in my previous article were not properly drawn to
scale for typical ball speeds. Bob Jewett pointed this out to me, allowing me to make amends.
(Thanks, Bob). Diagrams 2 and 3 show cue ball trajectories for various follow and draw shots
covering a typical range of shot speeds (2 to 8 mph). TP A.4 provides some additional plots for a
range of slower speeds.

     Shots “a” through “d” in Diagram 2 are natural roll shots. In other words, the cue ball is
rolling (i.e., not sliding or skidding) at object ball impact. There are several things worth noticing
in Diagram 2:

                  1. The harder you hit a follow (or draw) shot, the longer the cue ball persists in the
                     tangent line direction before curving (see NV 4.20, NV 4.21, and NV 4.24).

                  2. Regardless of speed, the angle of the final straight-line path of the cue ball is the
                     same (close to 30 degrees away from the initial cue ball direction for most cut
                     shots). This is one thing that makes the 30° rule so useful (see my April-July ’04
                     and March-June ’05 articles).

                  3. The cue ball’s path stays curved longer for faster shots, before heading in the final
                     straight-line direction.

                  4. To create natural roll at object impact, you need to hit the cue ball above center only
                     for faster shots (and/or when the cue ball is close to the object ball to begin with).
                     Path “a” can have a center-ball hit because the cue ball has enough time and
                     distance to develop natural roll on its own (with the assistance of the friction from
                     table cloth). For a fast shot like path “d,” you must hit the cue ball above center to
                     ensure natural roll at impact.
                                                                    fast
                                                                    medium
                                                                    slow

                                                                a                  fast
                                                                                   medium
                                                                                   slow
                                            fast
                                                                           b
                                            medium
                                            slow                                            fast
                                                                                            medium
                                                     stun                      c            slow

                                                                           d              fast
                                                      tangent                             medium
                                                        line                              slow

                    Diagram 2 Natural roll follow shots at different speeds

                NV 4.24 – 30° rule speed effects
normal video

    Diagram 3 shows the effects of speed on various draw shots. Shots “a” through “d” each
have the same amount of bottom spin. That’s why the slower shots (e.g., “a”) are shown with
larger cue tip offsets from center-ball than the faster shots (e.g., “d”). With slower speed, the
skidding of the cue ball causes the bottom spin to wear off faster over distance. HSV 3.1
provides a good illustration of this effect. Also notice that, as with natural-roll follow shots, all of
the draw shot paths end up going in the same direction; although, the path shapes vary
significantly with speed. Unfortunately, with draw shots, there is no magical 30° rule that will help
you reliably predict cue ball motion because speed, spin, and cut angle have such big effects.
But don’t despair ... we will look at this closer in future articles.
                                                                                       fast
                                            fast
                                                                                       medium
                                            medium
                                            slow
                                                             a                         slow

                                                                 b           stun

                                             fast                    c
                                             medium                             tangent
                                             slow
                                                                         d        line

                                                      fast                          fast
                                                      medium                        medium
                                                      slow                          slow

                     Diagram 3 Constant bottom spin draw shots at different speeds

                      HSV 3.1 – Stop-shot showing loss of bottom spin over distance
high-speed video

     I hope you are enjoying my series of articles about the work of Coriolis. In future articles, I
will use some high-speed video results to help explain how and why some of Coriolis’ other
conclusions may or may not be valid in different situations. I will also show how some of Coriolis’
other conclusions might be useful in your game.

Good luck with your game, and practice hard,
Dr. Dave

PS:
            •      If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can
                   access them online at billiards.colostate.edu.
            •      If you interested in the physics of pool, you might be interested in the new
                   “Pool/Billiards Physics Resources” section of my website. It lists and provides links
                   to many general interest and technical books and articles that explore the world of
                   pool physics.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” (2004, Sterling
Publishing).
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/coriolis_was_brilliant_but_he_didn_t_have_a_high_speed_camera_part_iv_maximum_cue_tip_offset.pdf
title: Coriolis was brilliant ... but he didn't have a high-speed camera
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                         ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Coriolis was brilliant ... but he didn’t have a high-speed camera –
Part IV: maximum cue tip offset”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., HSV A.16) help you locate the resources on the
website.

     This is the fourth article in a series I am writing about the pool physics book written in 1835 by
the famous mathematician and physicists Coriolis. Two months ago, I described some high-
speed camera work I’ve done and showed some examples that relate to some of Coriolis’
conclusions. Last month’s article dealt with the shape of the cue ball’s path after hitting an object
ball, and the effect of spin and speed on the shape of the path. FYI, all of my past articles can be
viewed on my website in the instructional articles section.

     The topic of this article is Coriolis’ conclusion summarized in Principle 24. He claims that to
achieve maximum English, the cue tip should not contact the cue ball more than half a ball radius
off center, as shown in Diagram 1. For a pool ball, with a diameter of 2 1/4 inches and a radius
of 1 1/8 inches, the corresponding contact point would be off center by 9/16 of an inch. It just so
happens that the radius of the red circle on an Elephant Practice cue ball (this is the cue ball used
in many of the NV and HSV video clips on my website) happens to be exactly 9/16 of an inch.
The reason for this is that hitting the cue ball with offsets much larger than this creates a high risk
of miscuing. In the remainder of the article, I will refer to the amount of tip offset as “x” (see
Diagram 1) and the ratio of offset to ball radius (x/R) as the offset factor.

Principle 24 Cue tip offset for maximum English

To achieve maximum English, the point of contact of the cue tip with the cue ball should
be half a ball radius off center (see Diagram 1).

                                                contact
                                                 point

                                                          R

                                                    x = 0.5R
                                                                      maximum
                                                                       English

                     Diagram 1 Contact point offset for maximum English

    In Coriolis’ book, there are actually several different analyses involving tip offset. In one
analysis, he shows that for offset factors greater than 0.6, the amount of English will be reduced
because the cue tip will not slow down enough after initial impact and it will stay in contact with
the cue ball for a while. The claimed result is that the cue tip will rub on the spinning cue ball
creating friction, which would reduce the amount of spin. In Coriolis’ summarizing conclusions,
he states that an offset factor of 0.5 results in the maximum English, but after reading his 0.6
analysis, it seems that he is claiming offset factors up to 0.6 will result in more English. To be
honest, I wasn’t able to resolve the apparent discrepancy after careful study of his document.
But, as I’ll show later, experimental evidence seems to back up the 0.6 number. Although, 0.5 is
the typical recommended limit beyond which miscues are too risky.

     In TP A.12, I present an analysis that relates the offset factor to what I call the spin rate
factor (SRF), which is a measure of how much spin (rotational speed) the cue ball acquires
compared (as a ratio) to the amount of linear (translational) speed of the ball’s center. A SRF of 0
implies the cue ball has no spin (e.g., a stun shot), a SRF of 1 implies the amount of spin is the
same as the natural roll rate for the cue ball (e.g., a natural roll follow shot), and a SRF greater
than 1 implies a spin rate greater than the natural roll rate (e.g., a follow shot with excess spin). It
turns out that for the maximum recommended offset factor (0.5), the spin rate factor is 1.25,
which means the cue ball has 25% more spin than the natural roll rate. The examples I cite
above are for follow shots, but the spin rate factor can also be used to quantify English sidespin
(although the amount of spin is still compared to the natural roll rate).

                   TP A.12 − The relationship between cue ball spin and cue tip offset
technical proof

     Recently, I performed a high-speed video study to try to observe a potential effect of
decreased spin rate factor at larger offsets. The super slow motion video footage can be viewed
in clips HSV A.98-A.109. The experiment involved using various cue sticks with various
hardness tips from soft to super hard (phenolic). Three stroke speeds were tested for each tip.
For each speed, the tip offset was increased gradually on successive shots until there was a
miscue. Each HSV clip shows a single hardness tip at a single speed but for several increasing
offsets leading up to a miscue. I was fortunate to have Dave Gross help me with the filming. He
is a great player with excellent technique, helping to ensure a consistent and accurate stroke for
the experiment. Thanks Dave!

                   HSV A.98-A.109 – English and squirt for various hardness tips at various speeds
high-speed video   and increasing offsets.

     The largest non-miscue offset and resulting spin rate factor was from the fourth shot in HSV
A.106. Diagram 2 shows some stills from the clip. The cue tip hits the cue ball in still “a,”
deflects away from the cue ball as the cue ball moves in stills “b” and “c,” and gets close to
contacting the cue ball again in still “d” (but doesn’t). By stills “e” and “f,” the cue sticks starts
slowing and the cue ball starts separating more from the cue tip. Diagram 3 (from HSV A.16)
shows a close-up of cue tip contact and the resulting cue stick deflection away from the cue ball
immediately after impact for a typical hard shot with lots of English. HSV A.5 and HSV A.25
show larger scale views so you can see typical cue tip deflection and resulting cue stick vibration.
The sequence in Diagram 3 corresponds to the action between stills “a” and “b” of Diagram 2
(although the video clips are of different shots). Notice, in Diagram 3, that the cue tip deflects
away from the cue ball significantly immediately after impact between stills “b” and “c.” Only three
ten-thousandths of a second (0.0003 sec) have elapsed between stills “b” and “c!” Also notice
the cloud of chalk forming in still “c” and growing in still “d.” Don’t forget to brush and vacuum
your table cloth periodically!
                   HSV A.106 – English and squirt for a Predator 314 shaft at slow speed and
                   increasing offsets
                   HSV A.16 – Side-English cue-tip reaction for a very large offset, very fast speed,
high-speed video   non-miscue shot
                   HSV A.5 - Cue stick deflection during a hard shot with English
                   HSV A. 25 - Cue stick deflection and vibration due to firm stroke with English
                     (a)                                                (d)

                     (b)                                                (e)

                     (c)                                                (f)

                               Diagram 2 Stills from HSV A.106

               (a)                            (b)                             (c)

               (d)                            (e)                             (f)

                               Diagram 3 Stills from HSV A.16

    The spin rate factor measured for the fourth shot in HSV A.106 was 1.37, which means the
cue ball had 37% more spin than the natural roll rate. As shown in TP A.12, this spin rate factor
corresponds to an offset factor of 0.55, so my experimental results show that the cue ball can be
struck, without miscue, further off center than 0.5R, but not by much.
     The results of the high-speed video analysis show that the larger the offset, the larger the
spin rate factor (i.e., the cue ball gets more spin). At large offsets, the cue tip deflects away from
the cue ball and does not remain in contact. Even at the largest offsets, on the verge of a
miscue, the cue tip did not contact the cue ball again after the initial contact, although it came
close a few times. In other words, post-impact rubbing of the cue tip as described by Coriolis was
not observed for any of the shots. Although, I wouldn’t rule it out as a possibility just because I
haven’t observed it yet. Secondary contact (and rubbing) was close to happening in HSV A.106,
and Coriolis’ analysis is valid (although, he assumes a rigid cue stick with no deflection and
straight-line cue ball motion with no squirt).

     So the bottom line of this article is: to apply maximum English, you can hit the cue ball as far
off center as you want as long as you are confident you won’t miscue. The 0.5R offset is still
probably a good limit to stay within. Maybe that’s why Coriolis listed it this way in his conclusion
summary.

    I hope you are enjoying my series of articles about high-speed video and the work of Coriolis.
Next month I’ll conclude the series by taking a closer look at Coriolis’ method for aiming massé
shots.

Good luck with your game, and practice hard,
Dr. Dave

PS:
        •   If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can
            access them online at billiards.colostate.edu.
        •   If you are interested in the physics of pool, you might be interested in the new
            “Pool/Billiards Physics Resources” section of my website. It lists and provides links
            to many general interest and technical books and articles that explore the world of
            pool physics.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” (2004, Sterling
Publishing).
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/coriolis_was_brilliant_but_he_didn_t_have_a_high_speed_camera_part_v_masse_shot_aiming.pdf
title: Coriolis was brilliant ... but he didn't have a high-speed camera
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                        ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Coriolis was brilliant ... but he didn’t have a high-speed camera –
Part V: massé shot aiming”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the fifth article in a series I am writing about the pool physics book written in 1835 by
the famous mathematician and physicists Coriolis. Three months ago, I described some high-
speed camera work I’ve done and showed some examples that relate to some of Coriolis’
conclusions. In the last two months, I presented principles dealing with the shape of the cue
ball’s path after hitting an object ball, the effect of spin and speed on the shape of the path, and
how to achieve maximum English. FYI, all of my past articles can be viewed on my website in the
instructional articles section.

     This month, I look at the system Coriolis developed for aiming massé shots (e.g., see NV
7.11 and NV 7.12). Principle 25 summarizes Coriolis’ system, which helps you visualize the final
direction (angle) of the cue ball path based on the aim point on the table surface. Diagram 1
illustrates how the system is applied. The final direction of the cue ball path is along line RA,
which connects the original cue ball resting point (point R) to the aiming point on the cloth (point
A). Using the letters shown in the diagram, with “B” indicating the cue ball contact point, the
Coriolis massé aiming system can be referred to as the “BAR” method (“B” for ball, “A” for aim,
and “R” for resting point). TP A.19 presents the math and physics behind Coriolis’ method and
shows example cue ball trajectories for various cue stick elevations and shot speeds. NV B.41
and NV B.42 demonstrate how the method is used in practice.
                  NV 7.11 – Large-curve massé shot
                  NV 7.12 – Small-curve massé shot
normal video
                  NV B.41 – Coriolis masse shot aiming method with a large-curve example
                  NV B.42 – Coriolis masse shot aiming method small-curve example

                  TP A.19 – Massé shot aiming method, and curved cue ball paths
technical proof
Principle 25 Coriolis’ massé shot aiming system

With a massé shot, the final path of the cue ball will be in a direction parallel to the line drawn
between the initial base point of the cue ball and the aiming point on the table (see Diagram 1).

                                   aiming
                                     line

            contact point                                                           curved
           on the cue ball              resting point                               cue ball
                 (B)                   of the cue ball                               path
                                        on the table                    fast

                                             (R)                        medium
        aiming point                                                    slow

      on the table cloth
             (A)                                                                  A R
                                                                                   B
                                                               theoretical
                                                             final direction
                               side view
                                                               of cue ball
                                                           (in RA direction)

                                                                               top view

                    Diagram 1 Coriolis’ (“BAR”) massé shot aiming system

    With a massé shot, if the only thing you had to be concerned with was the final direction
(angle) of the cue ball path, the Coriolis aiming system would be all you need. The aiming
system does a fairly good job at predicting the final direction of the cue ball for a wide range of
massé and small curve shots. Unfortunately, shot speed and the shape of the cue ball trajectory
also play huge roles in massé shot aiming. If you don’t have a good feel for speed and the
effects of table conditions, you will not be very successful with massé shots. Like many things in
pool, this can come only with a great deal of practice.

     Diagram 2 shows the effects of speed with an example shot. You must contact the 1-ball to
avoid a foul; but unfortunately, the other balls on the table block any reasonable kick or jump shot
possibilities. Other than playing a deliberate foul to try to tie up some balls in a cluster (e.g., by
hitting the 2-ball towards the 4-ball), about the only option is a massé shot. The illustration in the
top, left of the diagram shows the cue stick elevation and cue ball contact point, and the
illustration in the top, right shows the final cue ball direction (line RA) as predicted by the Coriolis
aiming system. With just the right amount of speed, you can pocket the 1-ball and maybe even
get lucky enough to have a shot at the 2-ball (or at least be able to play a safety). However, as
the diagram shows, speed is critical. If the speed is either too slow or too fast, you won’t even
come close to hitting the 1-ball. All three cue ball paths shown have the same final direction (i.e.,
the final straight-line motion is at the same angle), but only the center path points towards the 1-
ball. This is one reason why massé shots are often so difficult and should be avoided when
possible.
                                                                           R A
                                                                           B

                                 elevated cue
                                                        too
                                                        fast

                                                                just
                                                               right
                                                                           9
                                    5                                            3
                                          2       too
                                                 slow
                                                                       4             1

                          Diagram 2 Example shot showing importance of speed

     Massé shots are tough, and they require lots of practice. The Coriolis aiming system is not a
silver bullet that will make you shoot massé shots like a trick-shot artist. However, it does provide
a good aiming reference. As we have seen above, you need to have a good feel for speed to be
effective. Here are some additional points to keep in mind when trying out the system:
            •      It is critical to have a stable bridge and accurate stroke to be confident with the
                   contact point on the cue ball. If you can’t stroke where you are aiming, no aiming
                   system will help you predict the cue ball path.
            •      The final cue ball direction might come up a little short of the theoretical prediction.
                   Coriolis made some assumptions in his analysis that aren’t perfectly true on a real
                   pool table. For example, he assumed that the force impulse provided from the cue
                   stick is exactly in line with the cue stick. Unfortunately, due to squirt effects, this isn’t
                   perfectly true. When the cue ball is struck off center, the total impulse is not exactly
                   in the cue stick direction. Also, the cue stick can deflect significant during impact.
                   HSV A.60 shows super-slow-motion video of the cue stick deflecting significantly
                   during impact (see my August, ’05 article for more details).
            •      The cue ball will jump and skip some, and the amount will vary with cue stick
                   elevation and speed. This will affect the shape of the cue ball path; although, the
                   final direction will not be affected much.
            •      The type of cloth can have a big impact on massé action. A high-friction (“sticky”)
                   cloth can make it difficult to get a big curve because the initial impact with the table
                   cloth can limit the action of the cue stick.

                      HSV A.60 – Massé draw shot with firm follow-through and good action
high-speed video

    Like many things in pool and other sports, to excel at a difficult technique you need to
practice a lot. Unfortunately, massé shot practice can be a little abusive to the table cloth,
especially if your technique is not very good. So if you care about the table you are using, you
should consider using a piece of spare cloth to limit cloth abuse (see NV 7.11).
     I hope you are enjoying my series of articles about the work of Coriolis. In next month’s
article, I’ll conclude the series, looking at Coriolis’ conclusions concerning half-ball natural roll
shots.

Good luck with your game, and practice hard,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access
          them online at billiards.colostate.edu.
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, impact
          line, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
          come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
          glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/coriolis_was_brilliant_but_he_didn_t_have_a_high_speed_camera_part_vi_maximum_rolling_deflection.pdf
title: Coriolis was brilliant ... but he didn't have a high-speed camera
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                         ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Coriolis was brilliant ... but he didn’t have a high-speed camera –
Part VI: maximum rolling deflection”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV 3.8) help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the sixth and final article in a series I am writing about the pool physics book written in
1835 by the famous mathematician and physicists Coriolis. Over the past five months, I
described some high-speed camera work I’ve done and showed some examples that relate to
some of Coriolis’ conclusions. In the last three months, I presented principles dealing with the
shape of the cue ball’s path after hitting an object ball, the effect of spin and speed, the technique
required to achieve maximum English, and the system Coriolis developed for aiming massé
shots. FYI, all of my past articles can be viewed on my website in the Instructional Articles
section. This month, I look at Coriolis’ conclusion concerning cue ball deflection angle for natural
roll shots, where the cue ball is rolling (i.e., not skidding or sliding) when it hits the object ball.

     Diagram 1 illustrates the cut angle and deflected cue ball angle for various ball-hit fractions.
If you are unfamiliar with these terms, you should spend some time studying the diagram.
Principle 26 summarizes Coriolis’ conclusion, which states that for a rolling cue ball, the final
deflected angle of the cue ball is largest (about 34°) for a cut angle slightly smaller than a half-ball
hit. People sometimes assume that the maximum deflection occurs exactly at a half-ball hit; but if
you want to be precise, it occurs at a cut angle of 28.1°, which corresponds to a ball-hit fraction of
0.53, instead of 30°, which corresponds to a ball-hit fraction of 0.5. (This is hardly enough of a
difference for most people to care about; but Coriolis was a brilliant mathematician and physicist,
and precision was important to him). The deflected cue ball angles (33.67° for a 1/2-ball hit vs.
33.75° for a 0.53-ball hit) are even less different than the cut angles, and it is practically
impossible for a person to detect this difference (without accurate measuring instruments). If you
want to see where all of the numbers come from, and if you like math and physics, check out TP
3.3 and TP A.4. There, you can find complete derivations and interesting plots of the results.

Principle 26 Coriolis’ maximum rolling deflection

For a cue ball with natural roll, the largest deflection angle the cue ball can experience after
impact with an object ball is 33.7°, which occurs at a cut angle of 28.1°.

                  TP 3.3 − 30° rule
technical proof   TP A.4 - Post-impact cue ball trajectory for any cut angle, speed, and spin

     Diagram 1 shows the cut angles and cue ball deflection angles for 1/4-ball, 1/2-ball, and 3/4-
ball hits. Notice that the cut angle is very different for these three shots, but the cue ball deflected
angle is fairly close to 30° over the entire range. This is the basis of the 30° rule. If you have
read any of my articles in the past, you know I have written a lot about this very useful principle.
My April ’04 article presented the basics, my May ’04 and June ’04 articles showed various
applications and examples, and my February ’05 through June ’05 articles looked at various
effects (e.g., speed, friction, elasticity, and English) in more detail. For demonstrations of the 30°
rule and a half-ball hit, see NV 3.8 through 3.10, NV 4.24, and NV 7.4. NV 3.8 is particularly
useful because it shows how you can use your hand to visualize the 30° direction. Here’s a
useful poem to help you remember and apply the 30° rule:

                                        If you let one finder stay,
                                     The other finger points the way.
                                                  Peace.

                                     deflected
                   cut angle          angle                                           14.5º
                                                      30º
                      48.6º          27.3º                          33.7º                        27.6º

    top view:              1/4                                    1/2                3/4
  (looking from
      above
    the table)

      front view:
    (looking along
     the cue stick)
                               1/4                          1/2                            3/4
                          a) 1/4-ball hit             b) 1/2-ball hit               c) 3/4-ball hit

       Diagram 1 Cut angles and cue ball deflection angles for various ball-hit fractions

                  NV 3.8 – Using your hand to visualize the 30° rule
                  NV 3.9 – 30° rule example
                  NV 3.10 – Using the 30° rule to check for and prevent a scratch
normal video      NV 4.24 – 30° rule speed effects
                  NV 7.4 – 30° rule billiard shot

    So how can Principle 26 be useful in practice? Well, knowing that the cue ball will deflect at
an angle slightly larger for shots close to a 1/2-ball hit might help when you are using the 30° rule
to avoid scratches, aim carom shots, plan break-up and avoidance shots, and get through traffic
during position play (see my April ’04 through June ’04 articles for examples). Remember, the
30° rule isn’t perfect over the entire range of ball-hit fractions. The deflected angle is a little larger
close to a 1/2-ball hit (and even a little larger for a 0.53-ball hit), and it is smaller for cut angles
closer to a 1/4-ball hit (i.e., a thinner hit) or a 3/4-ball hit (a thicker hit). So if you are using your
peace-sign hand (see NV 3.8), stretch those fingers a little (to slightly widen the angle) for shots
close to a 1/2-ball hit, and relax them a little (to slightly shorten the angle) for shots closer to a
1/4-ball hit or 3/4-ball hit. Diagram 2 shows an example where you need to be aware of the
subtle differences in the final cue ball direction. A run-out might be difficult in this situation due to
the 5-ball-6-ball cluster. There also aren’t any easy-to-execute safety opportunities. A carom
shot, where you deflect the cue ball off the 1-ball into the 9-ball, is most definitely the best
alternative with this table layout. Whenever I see 30° rule carom opportunities like this at the
table, I salivate (like Pavlov’s dog). I just pull out my trusty (and well calibrated) peace-sign hand
and rejoice with delight if my index or middle finger happens to point to the target. As shown in
my June ’04 article, if the shot is aligned well, you have a huge margin of error (i.e., the shot is
tough to miss). Unfortunately, the shot in Diagram 2 is not lined up perfectly in the 30° direction.
But this is where Principle 26 comes into play. The required carom angle is a little larger than
30°, so we want to hit the shot as close to a 1/2-ball hit (or 0.53-ball hit) as possible to ensure
enough cue ball deflection. It is a good idea to practice with your peace-sign hand to know how
much to stretch your fingers to be able to predict the direction of the slightly larger angle. As
described and illustrated in my June ’05 article, you can also use speed to adjust the cue ball’s
path (by offsetting it along the tangent line), before it turns to the final deflected angle direction
(see NV 4.24). This can come in handy if the deflected angle alone, at slow speed, doesn’t quite
get you to the target.

                                                                  6
                                                              5
                           fast
                           medium
                           slow

                  natural roll shot

                                                             27.6º
                                  1
                                                   30º
                                         33.7º

                           stretch your peace sign hand a little
                           to visualize the maximum deflection angle                          9

            Diagram 2 Example where the maximum cue ball deflection is perfect

    I hope you have enjoyed my series of articles about the work of Coriolis. Next month, we’ll
look at how to predict cue ball motion for various types of draw shots.

Good luck with your game, and practice hard,
Dr. Dave

PS:
        •   If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can
            access them online at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” (2004, Sterling
Publishing).
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/cross_table_cb_control.pdf
title: Cross Table CB Control
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Cross-Table CB Control”                                                      ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     Do you know how to control the cue ball (CB) when going across the table off a ball close to the side rail?
In recent online video NV L.57, I covered a system that can help you plan and execute many types of shots like
this, where precise CB control is important. I’ll summarize all the key points here.

     The basic system is illustrated in Image 1. With a slow-rolling ½-ball-hit on a ball close to the side rail, the
CB heads 4 diamonds up on the rail across the table. This system applies when the center of the CB is aimed
right through the edge of the object ball (OB), shooting parallel to the short rail and perpendicular to the long
rail. The video shows many game-situation examples where knowledge of this system is useful.

                                      Image 1 ½-ball-hit 4-diamond shift

      The system also works for hits on balls not hanging in the corner. Hitting a ball close to the cushion by the
first diamond would still result in a 4-diamond shift across the table, going 1 diamond above the side pocket.
And with the OB at the 2nd diamond, the CB would go 2 diamonds above the side. And as shown in Image 2,
when the 4-diamond shift sends the CB into a short rail, the extra diamonds mirror back to the long rail. If the
line heads one diamond past the corner, the CB will instead rebound off the short rail to go one diamond above
the corner. Be aware that results will depend a little on table conditions, so it is important to practice a wide
range of shots to develop a feel for what speeds work for the ½-ball hit. And sometimes, a hit slightly thinner
than ½-ball might be required.

Billiards Digest                                       1                                              September, 2024
                                           Image 2 System Shift

    The system can also be adjusted for cases where the OB is off the side rail. For each diamond the OB is
from the side rail, the CB shifts an additional diamond. In Image 3, where the OB is one diamond away from
the side rail, the CB would head 1 diamond past the corner, so it goes 1 diamond above. With the OB 2
diamonds from the side rail, the CB would go 2 diamonds past the 4-diamond target, in this case 2 diamonds
above the corner. As demonstrated in the video, when the OB is farther from the rail, more speed is required
to hold the line. At slower speed, the CB curves forward too soon, causing the CB to come up well short of the
expected target.

                                          Image 3 Distance Shift

Billiards Digest                                    2                                           September, 2024
     The system can also be applied when the approach angle is not straight into the first rail. For every ½
diamond the approach angle is shifted, the CB shifts by approximately 1 diamond across the table. In Image
4, the ½ diamond shift sends the CB about a diamond longer. A ½ diamond angle shift in the other direction
would send the CB a diamond short into the side. As shown in the video, a shot like this is very sensitive to
speed. Just a little more speed sends the CB well long of the expected target.

                                            Image 4 Angle Shift

    Sidespin can be used to change the system CB direction. Imagining an analog clockface on the CB, each
hour of tip position from a high hit at 12 o’clock changes the shift across the table by about a diamond. With
the tip at about 11 o’clock, the sidespin sends the CB about 1 diamond short; although, the reverse spin kills
the speed, limiting what can be done with type of shot. As shown in Image 5, with the tip at about 1 o’clock,
the CB goes about 1 diamond longer than the side. With the tip at about 2 o’clock, the CB goes about 2
diamonds longer than the side. With the tip at about 3 o’clock, the CB goes about 3 diamonds longer. And
with the tip at about 4 o’clock, with slow enough speed for drag to make the CB roll before reaching the OB, the
CB goes about 4 diamonds longer than the side to the top-left corner. All of these shots are demonstrated in
the video.

Billiards Digest                                     3                                           September, 2024
                                             Image 5 Sidespin Effects

     Ball-hit-fraction can also be changed to alter the CB path. Remember, a ½-ball hit shifts 4 diamonds across
the table. A ¼-ball hit instead shifts 3 diamonds across the table. An 1/8-ball hit shifts 2 ½ diamonds. And an
even-thinner hit (at about 1/12) shifts 2 diamonds. Hits fuller than ½-ball are less predictable, and the CB loses
significant speed, making these types of shot less useful for CB control across the table.

    All the effects mentioned above can be used in combination based on shot layout and requirements. See
online video NV L.57 for some interesting game-situation examples showing how to do this. I hope the system
and adjustments help you better control the CB and win more when going across the table.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV L.57 – Cross-Table CUE BALL CONTROL System
   normal video

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                         4                                             September, 2024
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/cue_tip_size_and_shape_effects.pdf
title: Cue Tip Size And Shape Effects
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Cue Tip Size and Shape Effects”                                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Does the size and shape of the cue tip really matter much? The short answer is No. Although, for applying
spin, a smaller-diameter shaft and rounder tip are generally recommended. Now let’s look at the details, all of
which are covered in online video NV L.54.

     First, as shown in the video, there is no significant difference among typical pool cue shaft sizes in the 10-
13 mm range. Although, for solid maple shafts and some carbon fiber shafts, a larger diameter will result in
more cue ball (CB) deflection and will have a stiffer hit. But these things are mostly a matter of personal
preference. If you use a closed bridge, you might have a shaft diameter preference, but it really makes no
difference with an open bridge.

      As shown in Image 1, one factor related to both tip size and shape is shoulder height, which is related to
tip life. With a rounder tip, the shoulder is smaller (see “a”). As the tip wears down, the shoulder size shrinks.
If the tip is too round on a large-diameter shaft, there might not be any shoulder at all (see “b”). A flatter tip on
a larger diameter shaft will have the largest shoulder and the longest tip life (see “c”).

                                         Image 1 Tip shoulder effects

    As shown in Image 2, one possible problem with a large-diameter shaft is limited backspin potential. The
shaft on the left is smaller than the one on the right, and both tips are about as low as they can go relative to
the table. The tip contact point on the CB is higher for the larger shaft; so for this tip shape, the larger shaft
cannot apply as much backspin as the smaller shaft.

Billiards Digest                                       1                                                   June, 2024
                                Image 2 Limited backspin with large diameter

    Some people judge the amount of spin applied by visualizing “tips” or “half tips” of cue displacement from
center-ball. Obviously, as illustrated in the video, if you move a large-diameter shaft a full tip-width down, the
resulting tip contact point will be lower, and the amount of backspin will greater, as compared to doing the same
with a small-diameter shaft. So does a larger shaft allow you to put more spin on the ball? No, unless you
blindly use “tips of spin” and fail to judge the desired tip contact point correctly.

     The difference between a US nickel or dime radius tip is unimportant in a practical sense. Image 3 shows
a comparison of nickel (blue circle) and dime (red circle) tip shapes for three different cue offsets from center.
For an extreme comparison, also shown is a theoretical “round” tip (black circle) where the tip radius is the
same as the shaft radius, which is at the limit of what is possible. Look at where the red and blue lines cross
the CB surface, defining the tip contact point for the dime and nickel tip shapes. Notice how close together the
contact points are for the nickel and dime shapes for each tip offset. At the largest tip offset, giving maximum
spin, you can clearly see a difference, but it is very small. This makes it clear that there really isn’t any important
difference between a nickel and dime shape tip, despite what many people might think.

                                       Image 3 Contact point comparison

    Image 4 compares tips of different roundness on shafts of the same size for a given tip offset from center.
The rounder tip obviously creates more spin than a flatter tip for this cue position, but the differences in tip
roundness are very large in this comparison. So does this mean a rounder tip can apply more spin? No, but it
can do so with less cue offset from center. As shown in the video, a flatter tip can apply the same amount of

Billiards Digest                                        2                                                    June, 2024
spin, but with a different cue position, assuming the tip is round enough (see more below). A flatter tip is better
if you want to limit the amount of unintentional spin that can be applied; for example, to reduce possible CB
deflection due to slight cue alignment errors. With a flatter tip, the tip contact point will be closer to the center
of the CB for a given tip offset from center.

                                       Image 4 Tip roundness comparison

    The tip must be rounded to allow a full range of spins. With a large offset, if the tip is too flat, it will contact
the CB on the outer edge on the tip. This will not give reliable contact, and a miscue will be more likely. As
shown in Image 5, to prevent tip edge contact, the diameter of the shaft needs to be big enough based on the
shape of the tip. The image shows the minimum required shaft diameter, for each tip shape, to span the full
range of spins. To prevent tip edge contact, a tip needs to be rounded to a radius less than the shaft width. So
a 9mm shaft needs a tip radius less than 9mm (a dime or rounder), and a 12mm shaft needs a tip radius less
than 12mm (a quarter or rounder).

                                   Image 5 Minimum shaft diameter required

     The main point of this column is to show that shaft size and tip shape really don’t make much difference,
except at the extremes of very round or very flat tips on very large-diameter shafts. A nickel shape tip on any
common shaft size between 11 and 13mm is acceptable. Although, if you have a very small-diameter shaft
(less than 11mm), the tip should be rounded to a dime shape. The tip on a large-diameter shaft can be flatter,
which will limit unintentional spin; but if the shaft is too large or if the tip is too flat, contact with the edge of the
tip will be more likely, and the amount of backspin possible will be limited. I hope you found the information
helpful. Just remember: Size and shape are not important.

Billiards Digest                                          3                                                     June, 2024
Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV L.54 – Cue Tip Size And Shape Effects
   normal video

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                         4                                                  June, 2024
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/cue_tip_squirt_testing.pdf
title: Cue Tip Squirt Testing
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Cue Tip Squirt Testing”                                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at: dr-dave-
billiards.com.

    Recently, I was approached by an inventor to test a new cue tip he had designed. He claimed that it reduced
or eliminated cue ball (CB) deflection (AKA “squirt”). This prompted me to do a series of tests to determine if tip
type, construction, hardness, or height could have a significant effect on squirt or not. Tip choice definitely affects
the “hit” or “feel” of a cue, but the question here was: Does tip choice affect CB deflection? The short answer is:
No ... the tip has practically no effect on squirt. If you want the long answer, keep reading.

     Online video NV D.15 documents the results of an experiment used to test different shafts and various tips of
different types, hardnesses, and heights to determine the effects on squirt. The video also presents a simple
testing procedure that anyone can do on their own for any shafts and/or tips without requiring any special
equipment. The tips tested included an Ultraskin (very soft), a Kamui black (hard), a novel two-material
composite, and a phenolic. These tips cover a wide range of types and hardnesses. Each tip was mounted on
the same cue with a 13mm solid maple shaft. Two different tip heights were tested: 0.275” (tall) and 0.155”
(short), measured from the edge of the ferrule to the top-center of the tip (see the top of Diagram 1). Also, each
tip at each height was shaped to the same US-dime radius.

      Diagram 1 shows the layout used for the experiment. Three self-adhesive hole-reinforcement labels (“little
white donuts”) are located one diamond off the long rail adjacent to the first three diamonds. The donut at the
third diamond helps ensure accurate and consistent CB placement. The other two, along with the first diamond
on the short rail, define the center-ball hit line. The second set of donuts are 9/16” from the first, including one
next to the first diamond on the short rail. These donuts are used to ensure accurate and consistent cue
alignment and tip contact point for each off-center-hit shot. On the foot rail, there is a ruler template taped to the
table with the zero mark aligned with the center of the first diamond. This template is available in the Instructor
and Student Resources section of my website at billiards.colostate.edu. A center-ball hit sends the CB to the
zero point on the ruler. For the squirt test, the cue is aligned with the offset donuts and the CB squirts offline. We
used a camera mounted above the rail ruler angled toward the oncoming CB to measure the CB deflection at the
rail (see NV D.15 for a demonstration).

                                     Diagram 1 Table layout for experiment
Billiards Digest                                                                                             June, 2014
     We used an Elephant Practice Ball as the CB. It has a 1 1/8” red circle indicating the miscue limit for the tip
contact point. With the cue shifted to the left of center 9/16”, the center of the cue is aimed at the center of the left
side of the circle as shown in Diagram 2. (Note that this results in a tip contact point well within the red miscue
circle.) The donuts and red circle help ensure an accurate and consistent line of aim and tip contact point. If you
don’t have an Elephant Practice Ball, you can use a striped ball instead, with the stripe vertical and the center of
the cue aimed at the left edge of the stripe.

                                         Diagram 2 Elephant Practice Ball

     The first cue tested was a Predator Z2 with a medium-hardness Moori tip. The purpose for this was to
provide a low-squirt baseline to which to compare other measurements. For the main experiment, three different
people (myself, cue mechanic Rolland Becker, and local player Pom Rai) took 5-7 shots for each tip type and
height on the same high-squirt test shaft, doing our best to maintain a consistent aiming line, tip contact point, and
speed for each shot. People are not perfect, and each person could have a slightly different cue alignment, tip
contact point, speed, and stroke for each shot, but we did our best to be as consistent as possible. Only the 3
most consistent shots were kept from each 5-7 set, and then the results were averaged to help reduce variability.
All averages were rounded to the nearest 1/8”. The cue was kept as level as possible and fast speed was used to
minimize the effects of CB curving (swerve). Obviously, it would have been better to use a robotic testing
machine instead of silly humans, but with careful shooting and consistent testing procedures, impartial human
results can be fairly accurate and consistent.

     Table 1 shows a concise summary of the averaged squirt data from all of the tests. As is clear in the bottom
two rows, squirt (CB deflection) did not vary much with tip type, hardness, or size. These things definitely affect
the sound, feel, and efficiency of a cue (for more info, see the "feel, hit, feedback, and playability” resource page
in the FAQ section of my website), but the tip appears to have very little effect on CB deflection. Over the
extremely wide range of tip types, hardnesses, and heights we tested, the average squirt varied over a very small
range of 2 1/8’ to 2 1/2” (see the last row in Table 1). Tip height didn’t seem to make much of a difference at all.
With the Ultraskin and experimental tips, the squirt was a little larger with the shorter height; and with the Kamui
tip, the squirt was a little smaller with the shorter height. Generally, a harder tip is expected to produce slightly
less squirt than a softer tip since the tip contact time is less with a harder tip; however, a harder tip is also heavier,
which contributes to added “endmass” and squirt. For more info, see the “squirt - tip hardness effects” resource
page in the FAQ section of my website. For the data in these experiments, the hardest tip tested (the phenolic
tip) had slightly more squirt than the others.

    One thing that is well understood concerning squirt is that the effective “endmass” of the shaft is the primary
predictor of squirt. The Predator Z shaft, the end of which is hollowed out, with a shorter and lighter ferrule, and
with the shaft diameter turned down to 11.75 mm, had a much smaller squirt than the solid maple test shaft with a
diameter of 13 mm and a larger ferrule. The test shaft had an average squirt of about 2 1/4”, which is about 40%
larger than the 1 5/8” produced by the low-squirt Predator shaft.

Billiards Digest                                                                                                June, 2014
                                                 Table 1 Squirt Test Results

     I hope you enjoyed and learned something from my myth-busting experiment dealing with the non-effects of
tip type, hardness, and height on squirt. Now you have one less excuse when missing a shot using english. You
can’t blame it on the tip! It ain’t the tip!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

normal video     NV D.15 – Cue and Tip Testing for Cue Ball Deflection (Squirt)

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
               with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
               the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),”
and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                                June, 2014
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/design_fabrication_and_implementation_of_jump_cue_testing_machine.pdf
title: Design, Fabrication, and Implementation of Jump-Cue Testing Machine
topics: cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills, robotics_and_computation
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
University of North Florida
                                                                     UNF Digital Commons

All Volumes (2001-2008)                                      The Osprey Journal of Ideas and Inquiry

2006

Design, Fabrication, and Implementation of Jump-Cue Testing
Machine
Joe Lewandowski
University of North Florida

Ivan Faustino
Jacksonville Electric Authority

Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.unf.edu/ojii_volumes

    Part of the Engineering Commons

Suggested Citation
Lewandowski, Joe and Faustino, Ivan, "Design, Fabrication, and Implementation of Jump-Cue Testing
Machine" (2006). All Volumes (2001-2008). 63.
https://digitalcommons.unf.edu/ojii_volumes/63

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by
the The Osprey Journal of Ideas and Inquiry at UNF
Digital Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in
All Volumes (2001-2008) by an authorized administrator
of UNF Digital Commons. For more information, please
contact Digital Projects.
© 2006 All Rights Reserved
       DESIGN, FABRICATION, AND IMPLEMENTATION OF JUMP-CUE TESTING MACHINE

          Joe Lewandowski                                 Ivan Faustino                           Daniel Cox
         Research Assistant                                 Engineer                         Associate Professor
      University of North Florida                   JEA (Jacksonville Electric             University of North Florida
                                                            Authority)

ABSTRACT                                                            to obtain empirical results for the various design options and
     A device for measuring the effectiveness of a jump cue         configurations of jump cues.
performing the jump shot in the game of pool is presented. The           This paper describes progress and accomplishments on the
design, build, integration, and current application of the jump-    development of the jump-cue testing machine. Following the
cue testing machine are described. A physical system model is       design objectives, the design of the physical machine is next
described that allows for the basic actuation of the mechanical     described. The build (component selection and custom
system to be established and understood. The mechanical             fabrication) and integration of the jump-cue machine is
design embodiment of the jump-cue testing machine is                presented. A basic model for the actuation and an example
presented with mechanical design and realization aspects of the     application for the use of the jump machine are then presented.
device emphasized. Examples of current use of the jump-cue          In the conclusion, current project status and future work are
testing machine by industry are described.                          discussed.

INTRODUCTION                                                        NOMENCLATURE
     Mechatronics is the design and integration of mechanical,        KE      kinetic energy
electronic, sensor, and computer technologies into intelligent        PE      potential energy
systems. A pool cue design and manufacturing client, Predator         m       mass of jump cue and carriage
Products, Inc. of Jacksonville [1] has several applications for       k       spring constant
which mechatronics can be applied. Predator Products, Inc. is a       v       velocity of jump-cue
world-class supplier of pool cues with a majority of the top
professionals using their products. Their products include an       BACKGROUND
array of cues including pool cues for shooting, break cues,              The client desires a jump-cue testing machine that is able
jump cues, billiard cues, as well as other specialized cues.        to shoot the same jump shot with a high degree of repeatability.
Therefore, the company desires devices that can test and            This enables the client to demonstrate the performance of their
demonstrate the superior performance of their products.             jump cue compared to another in a consistent, repeatable
Undergraduate Mechanical Engineering students are working           manner. In the application of the jump-cue testing, a machine
on these mechatronics application projects.                         with ability to shoot the same shot with a high degree of
     Mechatronic devices have been developed for application        repeatability also facilitates the research and development
in the pool cue industry. This includes the design of a pool-       process. Rapid setup for jump-cue testing is therefore an
playing robotic device [2] and a device for measuring the           important attribute of the machine. For research and
effectiveness of a break shot occurring in a game of pool [3].      development of jump cues, many experiments must be
These devices incorporate the integration mechanical,               performed to obtain empirical data, thus the machine must be
electronic, and computer software into a mechatronic system.        easy to use to allow for rapid data collection.
     In this project, the client desires the machine to measure
the effectiveness of a jump cue. There are several reasons the
client wants this type of machine; first, the company is            DESIGN OBJECTIVES
designing and manufacturing a pool cue designed specifically             The jump-cue testing machine has two high-level design
for the “jump shot” (as opposed to a standard shooting cue). A      requirements directly related to the two primary reasons that the
jump shot occurs when the player wants to shoot the cue ball        client would like to have the device developed. 1) Design the
such that the cue ball jumps over another ball on a trajectory      jump-cue testing machine to be easily used in an applied
aimed at the target ball. Thus, the usefulness of the jump-cue      research and development setting, 2) design the jump-cue
testing machine helps demonstrate that a jump cue performs          testing machine as a performance measurement tool to measure
better under the capability of a repeatable shot. Another reason    the performance of various jump cues designed for jump shots.
the company desires the machine is to provide a jump-cue                 With an initial understanding of the parameters for a basic
testing machine to improve the effectiveness of the design          mechanical design, the design of the jump-cue testing machine
process for the jump cue itself. Many options exist for the         is developed considering a variety of alternatives. Several ideas
shape and mass distribution of a jump cue; therefore it is useful   have been considered and several prototype versions of the

                                                                    1
machine have been initially developed. It is apparent that ease
of use is a salient design feature. A basic concept for the jump-
cue testing machine is shown in Figure 1. The device is
designed to have three degrees of translational adjustment (X,
Y, and Z axes), and one degree of freedom in rotation to adjust
the angle of attack for the jump shot.
     The actuation and energy transfer within the machine
occurs with springs. A translating carriage (see Figure 1) is
attached to an adjustable platform. The carriage is spring
loaded to the platform. Adjustment of the spring force occurs
by cocking the spring actuator, through a pneumatic system,
and locking it with a trigger. To accomplish a jump shot, the
trigger is released. Ease of use attributes, in addition to the
adjustability, are ease of set-up for test runs. Due to the large
spring forces generated, the actuator is loaded with the
assistance of a pneumatic actuator.

                                                                         Figure 2. Jump-cue Testing Machine

    Figure 1. Design Concept for Jump-Cue Test Machine                    To help with the stability of the back end of the machine’s
                                                                     arm, a three foot lead screw is mounted to the arm’s square
    With the basic concept outlined, the build and                   tubing. This helps support the pneumatics and bearing at the
implementation phase for the jump-cue testing machine is             end of the arm, and allows height adjustment during the
discussed next.                                                      different angle shots. The lead screw can be seen supporting the
                                                                     jump-cue machine also shown in Figure 2.
BUILD OF JUMP-CUE TEST MACHINE                                            The second feature requirement of the jump-cue testing
     The requirements set by the client; Predator Products, Inc.     machine is the machine has to adjust for angle of attack from
of Jacksonville for the jump-cue testing machine as shown in         15o shot to a 90o shot, or directly above the cue ball. This is
Figure 2 establishes three major categories for design and build     accomplished with the dial rotary bearing seen in Figure 3. The
features.                                                            dial rotary bearing allows the user to adjust the pitch of the
     The first feature requirement is the machine has to be          machine’s arm within the degree limits set. While the
portable, yet the base has to be fixed during the operation of the   machine’s arm changes from, for example, 30o to 60o, the tip of
jump-cue machine. This is accomplished by mounting 1.5 inch          the machine’s arm gets further from the table because it is
thick hard wood to the top a portable tool chest. The base of the    rotating around the fixed axis of the dial bearing. To eliminate
jump-cue testing machine is then mounted with 0.5 inch bolts         this problem, the square tubes of the machine’s arm are allowed
to the hardwood. This base design allows the jump machine to         to slide through the frames supporting them as seen in Figure 3.
be moved around the billiards table to any location, and then        Once the desired distance from the table to the tip of the
the wheels of the tool chest are locked in place for stability       machine’s arm is set, a set screw is tightened to secure the
during operation                                                     position. The alignment of the tip of the jump cue to the ball
                                                                     can also be adjusted using the linear bearings on the base.
                                                                     These three bearings allow for translational adjustment in the X,
                                                                     Y, and Z directions.

                                                                     2
                                                                  This is done with two springs along the rod for the slider
                                                                  bearings attached to the plate supporting the butt of the jump
                                                                  cue. As the jump cue is pulled back, the slider bearing
                                                                  compress the two springs. Once the desired stroke is reached
                                                                  and the cue ball is in place, the plate supporting the butt of the
                                                                  jump cue is released, and the spring force accelerated the jump
                                                                  cue toward the ball.
                                                                       The industrial springs are extremely stiff. Therefore, a
                                                                  pneumatic Parker bearing is mounted under the sliding plate.
                                                                  To pull back the machine, a trigger mounted to the pneumatic
                                                                  Parker cylinder attaches to an eye bolt on the back of the
                                                                  sliding plate supporting the jump cue. The operator activates a
                                                                  simple I/O controller to allow air pressure to pull back the
                                                                  sliding plate. The pneumatics serves two functions. The first is
                                                                  to give a non-labor intensive way to load the machine making it
                                                                  very easy to use, and the second is to allow a way to control the
                                                                  spring force applied to the sliding plate. A regulator at the inlet
                                                                  of the cylinder controls the air pressure used to load the
                                                                  machine. By gauging the air pressure and surface area of the
                                                                  piston in the cylinder, the force pressing against the spring
                                                                  resistance is known. This eliminates the need to measure the
                                                                  distance the spring is compressed during each shot. Finally, to
                                                                  start the shot, the trigger is tripped, the sliding plate is released,
                                                                  and the two industrial springs accelerate the jump cue toward
                                                                  the ball. The guide seen in Figure 5 maintains the correct path
                                                                  for the jump cue. It utilizes four elastic straps to guide the cue.
     Figure 3. Angular Adjustment for Jump Shot                   Because the jump cue is tapered, elastic is used to allow for a
                                                                  secure guide throughout the entire length of the stroke.
    Figure 4 shows the adjustable bearings in the translational
adjustment (X, Y, and Z axes).

                                                                      Figure 5. Guide for Jump Cue

 Figure 4. Jump-Cue Testing Machine Front View

    The third major feature requirement is the machine has to
accelerate the jump cue enough to allow a jump shot to occur.

                                                                  3
                                                                   leading jump cues being sold on the market today. The second
BASIC MODEL FOR JUMP-CUE ACTUATION                                 phase is to test a prototype jump cue for baseline data, and then
    A basic model of the jump-cue testing machine is               test and document the changes in the prototype’s performance
presented using the conservation of energy. The change in          as modifications are made to the prototype.
kinetic energy of the jump cue can be expressed as follows:             The first phase requires the acquisition of all leading jump-
                                                                   cues on the market today for tests and evaluation. The jump
ΔKE = ΔPE spring                                       (1)         cues are tested and ranked on both qualitative and quantitative
                                                                   properties. The ease a jump cue jumps the cue ball is
                                                                   qualitatively measured for each jump cue. Some jump cues
With the potential energy to actuate the carriage with the jump    have a large target area where it strikes the cue ball while
cue attached stored in the spring. Here potential energy           others are require more precision where the cue’s tip hits the
associated with height is negligible compared to the energy        ball. The jump cues would not jump the ball unless the tip hit
content of the spring,                                             the exact location on the cue ball. Both the jump distance and
                                                                   jump height are quantitatively measured and documented for all
         k (Δs ) 2                                                 the jump-cues. To measure the jump distance, carbon paper is
ΔPE =                                                  (2)         laid on the table in the direction of the trajectory of the cue ball.
            2                                                      When the cue ball landed on the carbon paper, a landing mark
                                                                   is made. The distance from this mark to the initial placing of
The kinetic energy, once the spring is released is                 the ball is measured. It is decided by the client that it is not
                                                                   important to actually find the maximum height of the cue ball’s
      m(Δv) 2                                                      trajectory. Instead, it is important to know how quickly a jump-
ΔKE =                                                  (3)         cue could elevate a cue ball over another ball. This is quantified
        2                                                          by incrementally placing a ball closer to the cue ball prior to the
                                                                   jump. The closest distance a ball could be to the cue ball
Friction between the bearing and the rails is assumed negligible   without the cue ball touching it during the jump is measured.
for this calculation. Substituting equations (2) and (3) into      This measurement gives the manufacturer a value which is
equation (1) gives:                                                compared to all the other jump-cues tested of which jump-cue
                                                                   elevates the cue ball the quickest.
m(Δv) 2 k (Δs ) 2                                                       During the first phase of the jump-cue testing the client has
       =                                               (4)         become more familiar with how well the machine works. A
  2        2                                                       main ease of use attribute of the jump-cue testing machine is
                                                                   the ability of the machine to adjust many different ways, not
Solve equation (5) for Δv :                                        only to the different angle of attack, but also to the different
                                                                   sizes of jump-cues being tested. The adjustment on the base in
                                                                   the X, Y, and Z directions allow the operator to align the jump-
         k (Δs ) 2
Δv =                                                   (5)         cue precisely for each trial. This is extremely important with
            m                                                      jump cues that require more precision as they strike the cue ball
                                                                   during a jump shot. The radial adjustment used initially allows
                                                                   testing of all the cues at 30o, 45o, and 60o. By testing the jump-
With v o = 0 , before the trigger is released. Therefore,          cues at different angles, trends are noticed about the
                                                                   construction of the different cues. Qualities in some cues
                                                                   allowed them to jump consistently and precisely during high
         k (Δs ) 2
vf =                                                   (6)         angle shots, while other qualities allowed for distance during
            m                                                      low angle shots. Based on the data, the client has decided that
                                                                   two jump cues could be developed; one for short, high
gives the final velocity of the carriage, with the jump cue        precision shots and another for long, full table shots.
attached. This velocity can be used in more complex models of           From the data collected in the first phase of
impact between the jump cue and the cue ball.                      implementation, requirements are set for the development of
     With the transfer of energy from the spring, an estimate of   the new jump cue. After jumping and testing all the jump cues
the final velocity of the jump cue is possible., knowing its       in the market, the client has discovered proprietary theories of
mass, the mass of the carriage, and the spring constants. This     what properties the new jump-cue should have. This
model is to be used to quantify the parameters of the jump-cue     information is used in product development of a prototype for
testing procedures. As a priority, the client is primarily         the next generation of jump cue with the desired properties.
interested in obtaining empirical results using the jump-cue            The second phase of implantation is to test the new jump
testing machine. The machine’s repeatability to compare            cue prototype in the same manner as the jump-cues have been
commercially available jump cues and to those in product           tested previously. Once baseline data is obtained, small changes
development satisfies the current and immediate needs.             have been made to the jump cue to observe and improve
                                                                   performance. Again, the accuracy and precision of the jump-
EXAMPLE OF IMPLEMENTATION                                          cue testing machine is crucial to ensure the data logged could
    The initial uses for the jump-cue testing machine occurs in    be fairly compared to other jump cues or other variations within
two phases. The first phase is to test, compare, and rank the      the jump cue prototype.

                                                                   4
                                                                    jumps are relatively more accurate than the longer jumps, led
SAMPLE OF EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS                                      Predator to start developing both a short distance jump cue and
    During the first phase of the jump cue machine’s                a long distance jump cue. Both Jump Cue X and Jump Cue Y
implementation, 18 popular jump cues are tested. The jump           are very easy cues to jump. This is a qualitative remark from
cues are ranked according to jump distance, jump height,            our experiment. Both jump cues had a large area on the cue
accuracy, and ease of jump. Table 1 shows the results from          ball which could be struck to cause the cue ball to jump.
Jump Cue X’s preliminary jumps.

                          Jump Cue X                                                          Jump Cue Y

             SHOT         Total         Clearance                                SHOT         Total         Clearance
                         Distance        Length                                              Distance        Length
                           (in)            (in)                                                (in)            (in)
               1          36.00           5.875                                    1          61.00            5.00
               2          36.50           5.875                                    2          62.75            5.00
               3          36.75           5.875                                    3          63.00            5.10
               4          37.75           5.875                                    4          63.50            5.10
               5          39.50            6.00                                    5          63.50            5.10
               6          39.75            6.00                                    6          64.50           5.125
               7          39.75            6.00                                    7          64.50           5.125
               8          40.25            6.00                                    8          65.50           5.125
               9          40.25            6.00                                    9          66.50            5.30
               10         41.50           6.125                                    10         68.00            5.30

            AVG.           38.80           5.96                                  AVG.          64.28           5.13
           RANGE            5.50           0.25                                 RANGE           7.00           0.30
            STD.           1.89                                                  STD.           2.01
                                                                        Table 2. Jump results for Jump Cue Y
    Table 1. Jump results for Jump Cue X
                                                                         The “Clearance Length” of Jump Cue Y was shorter than
     From the results, one can see that the jump cue machine
                                                                    the “Clearance Length” of Jump Cue X. This means that a ball
was able to reliably jump a cue ball during the experiment, and
                                                                    can be closer to Jump Cue Y than Jump Cue X during a jump
all 10 jumps landed within a 5.50” range. The reliability of the
                                                                    and will not be hit during the jump. One can see that the trend
machine is critical if the results from one experiment are to be
                                                                    in the date shows that as the “total distance” goes up, the
compared to the results from another jump cue’s experiment.
                                                                    “Clearance Length” also goes up. This is due to the slight
     The “Total Distance” column gives the distance the cue
                                                                    change in the cue ball trajectory. The longer jumps have a
ball jumped across the table. As described before, carbon paper
                                                                    relatively flatter trajectory and therefore require more distance
was laid on the table, and therefore a dot was made where the
                                                                    to elevate above the height of the ball in its path. The shorter
cue ball landed. The distance from the center of the ball prior
                                                                    jumps have a higher trajectory, and therefore quickly elevate
to the shot to the dot created on the carbon paper gives the
                                                                    above the ball in its path.
“Total Distance.” The “Clearance Length” is the distance from
the center of the cue ball prior to the shot to the center of
another ball in the path of the shot. The other ball is             CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
incrementally moved closer to the cue ball until it is hit by the        This paper has described progress and accomplishments on
cue ball during the shot. This distance lets one understand how     the development of the jump-cue testing machine. The design
quickly a jump cue can jump a cue ball off the table. The           and build of a jump-cue testing machine for measuring the
smaller the “Clearance Length” is, the closer a ball can be to      effectiveness of a jump cue occurring for the jump shot in a
the cue ball during a jump without the cue ball hitting it during   game of pool has been presented. A basic physical system
the trajectory of the jump.                                         model of the actuation system has been described. The
     The results from Jump Cue Y are shown in Table 2. The          mechanical design concept and realization aspects of the device
performance of the two jump cues can now be compared. In            have been discussed. Examples of current use of the jump-cue
the category of “Total Distance,” one can see that Jump Cue Y       testing machine as currently being used by the project sponsor
clearly can jump the ball further than Jump Cue X. This extra       have also been discussed.
distance usually comes with a price. The standard deviation              The jump-cue testing machine has been used extensively
increases as the average jump length increases. This was seen       for the comparison of jump cues. The jump cues commercially
on all 18 of the jump cues tested. Realizing that the short         available have been tested and an increased understanding

                                                                    5
design attributes of these cues has been made possible by using   [2] Pombier, P., Wider, W., and Cox, D., “Mechatronic Device
the jump-cue testing machine to produce repeatable jump shots.        to Measure Break Shots”, ASME Southeastern Region XI
With this understanding, product development of the client’s          Technical Journal Volume 2, Number 1, pp. 3.1-6, April
jump cue product offerings has progressed. The basic model for        2003.
the actuation system will be used to improve the understanding
                                                                  [3] Williams J., Wider, W., and Cox, D., “Pool-Playing Robot
of jump cue modeling and interaction with the cue ball and
                                                                      Design Project”, ASME Southeastern Region XI Technical
quantify the dynamics of the jump shot.
                                                                      Journal Volume 3, Number 1, pp. 7.1-8, April 2004.
                                                                  [4] Faustino, I., Lewandowski, J., and Cox, D., “Design and
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS                                                       Build of Jump-Cue Testing Machine”, submitted to ASME
    The authors gratefully acknowledge the support and                Southeastern Region XI Technical Journal.
funding by Predator Products for this project.

REFERENCES
[1] http://www.predatorcues.com

                                                                  6
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/determining_manipulator_workspace_boundaries_using_the_monte_carlo_method_and_least_squares_segmentation.pdf
title: Determining Manipulator Workspace Boundaries Using The Monte Carlo Method And Least Squares Segmentation
topics: robotics_and_computation
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
[NO_EXTRACTED_TEXT]
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/diy_tip_replacement.pdf
title: Diy Tip Replacement
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“DIY Tip Replacement”                                                         ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     Recently, I posted online video NV J.69 demonstrating how to replace a cue tip, with no special tools
required. Obviously, if you have convenient access to a reliable and trusted cue mechanic, that is the best
option; but if you ever find yourself in a bind or need something fast, it is nice to also be able to do it yourself.
All you need is what is shown in Image 1: a block of wood, printer/copy paper, sandpaper sheets, super glue
gel, a towel, Scotch Magic tape, a utility knife, and a new tip. You will also need lots of patience to take your
time and be careful if you want to go a good job. The procedure consists of the 10 steps described below.

                                            Image 1 Things required

1. Remove Old Tip
     Throughout much of the procedure, the cue is supported on the towel and block as shown in Image 2. If
you want a softer surface to protect the shaft when cutting off the tip, you can use a leather or cork pad, but a
clean block of wood is fine. As shown in Image 3, carefully position the blade close to the ferrule, but make
sure you leave a small amount of material behind. You do not want to risk cutting into or damaging the
ferrule. Roll the shaft back and forth and use a sawing motion as you cut to make it a little easier.

Billiards Digest                                                                                           May, 2021
                                           Image 2 Shaft support

                                        Image 3 Removing the old tip

2. Scrape Ferrule
    Now carefully trim off the remainder of the tip, taking your time to remove only a thin sliver at a time. Be
sure to keep the blade as flush as possible with the ferrule. As you get closer to the ferrule, the knife should
mostly be scraping instead of cutting. Be careful to hold the knife and shaft in a way that you will not cut
yourself. On the final scraping passes, you can have the knife perpendicular to the ferrule. To remove the
remainder of the tip and glue residue, you can lightly sand the ferule end by holding sandpaper with a
centered finger while turning the shaft, being careful to not sand the outer shoulder of the ferrule. Use a
paper towel or clean rag to remove any remaining dust. When you are done, the ferrule end should look
clean.

3. Prepare Tip and Ferrule
    Now sand the back of the new tip so it will more easily absorb glue and be flat. It is best to use a circular
sanding motion, rotating the tip and shifting on the sandpaper frequently. The new tip should have a larger
diameter than the ferrule. Wipe the sanded tip on a paper towel to remove any remaining dust. Test the fit of
the tip on the ferrule to make sure it is oversized and fits flat with no wobble while turning and sliding.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        May, 2021
4. Tape Ferrule
    Now tape around the ferrule to build up the diameter to the size of the new tip to make it easier to center
the tip when gluing it on, and to keep the glue off the ferrule. Make sure the tape does not protrude beyond
the ferrule, but get it as close to the end as possible.

5. Glue New Tip On
     Now uniformly spread glue on the back of the tip and place a small drop in the center so the glue will
squeeze out evenly without any bubbles or voids. Center the tip on the tape-wrapped ferrule with gentle turns
and shifts. Gently press down on the tip to get the glue to squeeze out uniformly, being careful to keep the tip
centered. Now firmly apply and keep pressure on the tip. You can do this by hand by pushing the shaft tip-
down onto the table. As shown in Image 4, you can also wedge the shaft under a table with the tip down on a
board. Either way, make sure the pressure on the tip is uniform with the shaft vertical. Wait a minute or so
for the glue to totally set. When you are done, the tip will be centered and bonded to the tape-wrapped
ferrule.

                                     Image 4 Shaft wedged under table

6. Remove Tape
    Now remove the tape by peeling toward the tip. When necessary, you can scrape with your fingernail or
the utility knife to help separate the corners and edges of the tape. When you are done, the tip should extend
beyond the ferrule in all directions.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       May, 2021
7. Trim Tip
     As shown in Image 5, now trim away the glue residue and some of the excess tip material. Hold the
blade flush against the ferrule, and start with the blade angled, with the board and tip close to the edge of the
table. Trim only a little at a time with a sawing motion, being careful to not apply too much force. The tip
should be beveled out some when you are done. Do not try to remove too much material. The sanding steps
to follow will remove the excess.

                                          Image 5 Trimming the tip

8. Sand Tip
    The next step is to sand the tip down to the final diameter. First apply a layer of tape to ferrule. As
shown in Image 6, put down a sheet of the rough sandpaper and place the block over half. Then tape down
two pieces of cover paper across the sandpaper. Now position the block so only a tip-height-width strip of
sandpaper is exposed with the tip against the block. Only the tip should be touching the sandpaper.

                                         Image 6 Tip sanding setup

Billiards Digest                                                                                        May, 2021
     The joint end of the shaft is supported on the towel to keep the shaft above the table and to help angle
the tip into the sandpaper slightly. Holding the shaft near the ferrule, and with the other hand on the block to
keep everything in place, rub the tip back and forth to sand it down, turning the shaft frequently. Move to a
different part of the sandpaper and blow and wipe the debris away periodically. After the tip gets close to the
final diameter, switch to fine-grain sandpaper and continue. You can also fold over the towel to allow an even
closer final sand. Check the paper thickness periodically to make sure the surface is smooth and thick
enough to prevent the ferrule from being scratched, especially when using the rough sandpaper. When you
are done, the tip diameter will match the ferrule diameter.

9. Clean Up Tip and Ferrule
     You can fine sand the ferrule-and tip to help smooth things out even more. This will also clean up the
ferrule. Wrap fine sandpaper around the tip and ferrule, keeping it as flush as possible, and turn the shaft,
applying light sanding pressure with your fingers. Then change to an even finer grit. Finish it off with ultra-
fine sandpaper or emery paper. Now support the shaft on the unfolded towel and burnish the tip by wetting
the sides and then rubbing on the paper, turning the shaft frequently. If you want an even shinier finish, buff
the tip and ferrule on a piece of leather. When you are done, the tip will look professionally installed.

10. Shape and Chalk Tip
    All that remains is shaping and chalking the tip. You can use rough sandpaper curled in your hand while
turning the shaft. But if you have a tip-shaping tool, that is much easier. Regardless, it is good to smooth the
surface a little with fine-grit sandpaper when you are done; although, this is not necessary. Now thoroughly
chalk the tip and it is ready for play.

     I want to thank Bob Jewett for coming up with many parts of the procedure and for giving me lots of good
advice and guidance as I planned the video. Thanks Bob! If you want a detailed list of all steps used in this
video along with additional advice, see the “replacing a tip” FAQ page at billiards.colostate.edu. Hopefully,
in the future, if you do not have convenient access to a fast-turn-around cue mechanic when you need one,
you will be able to change a tip on your own. But be sure to study online video NV J.69 first and practice on
other cues so you will be ready.

      Good luck from Dr. Dave!

                    NV J.69 – HOW TO REPLACE A CUE TIP … No Special Tools Required
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        May, 2021
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/does_the_brand_of_chalk_really_matter.pdf
title: Does The Brand Of Chalk Really Matter
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Does the Brand of Chalk Really Matter?”                                      ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

     Have you ever heard claims about chalk like the following: “Pre-flag Master chalk is much better than Flag
Master chalk.” or “Blue Diamond and Kamui chalk let you put a lot more spin on the ball.”? Because I got
tired of hearing anecdotal claims like this without see convincing proof, I decided to do a careful and thorough
set of tests to compare the performance of five commonly used and often-discussed chalk brands: pre-flag
Master, Master, Lava, Blue Diamond, and Kamui (0.98). Four different sets of tests were performed to
determine:

     1. the miscue limit for maximum sidespin.

     2. the amount of cling/skid/kick caused by a chalk mark at the ball contact point.

     3. the number of sidespin shots possible with a single application of chalk before miscuing.

     4. how long chalk marks persist on the cue ball after multiple shots.

The testing procedures and results are documented in detail in online video NV F.1.

     The first set of tests determined if the maximum amount of sidespin or miscue limit varied with the type of
chalk. For each chalk, a large number of shots were attempted at increasing tip offsets from center. As is
clear in NV F.1, all of the chalks seemed to perform equally well concerning maximum sidespin and miscue
limit. With no chalk on the tip, very little sidespin can be applied, so chalk is important. It just doesn’t seem to
matter which brand you use when it comes to getting maximum sidespin, assuming the tip is chalked before
each shot.

     The next set of tests determined the amount of cling (AKA skid or kick) caused by a chalk mark at the
cue-ball-object-ball contact point. Remember, cling is an excess amount of throw caused by extra friction at
the ball contact point. To measure cut-induced throw, I used the 45° angle frozen-combo shot shown
Diagram 1. The balls were tapped into place and marked with self-adhesive hole-reinforcement donuts to
ensure consistent ball placements. The extra cue ball (CB) frozen to the 1 was used to help ensure an
accurate hit of the 1 into the 2. As a baseline, the clean balls, with no chalk marks, were first tested for the
expected amount of throw. The amount of throw varies some with speed, but the shots with the most
consistent speed were selected to provide a meaningful average. Then, the 1 ball was struck with a chalked
tip to create a natural chalk mark on the ball. The chalk mark was then placed at the contact point with the 2
ball for a test. After this test, a spare piece of table cloth was used to lightly wipe off the chalk mark, and the
test was repeated with the wiped-off mark at the contact point.

Billiards Digest                                                                                           July, 2015
                   Diagram 1 Shot setup used to measure cling caused by chalk mark

     Table 1 summarizes the results from the cling experiment. The chalk marks from all of the brands
resulted in significant cling. The amount of throw in each case was much greater than with the clean set of
balls with no chalk mark. For example, the Master chalk mark threw the 2 ball 8.9°, compared to 4.0° for the
clean balls. The Kamui chalk resulted in the largest cling (10.9°). Even after the Kamui chalk mark was
wiped off, the residue still created more throw (6.7°) than with the others (in the 4.2-5.4° range).

                               Table 1 Chalk mark cling experiment results

                                                            throw
                                   test           inch        cm       degrees
                                  clean           4 5/8       11.7       4.0
                                 Master          10 1/4       26.0        8.9
                              Master wiped        4 7/8       12.4        4.2
                                 pre-flag         9 7/8       25.1        8.5
                              pre-flag wiped        6         15.2        5.2
                                  Lava              9         22.9        7.8
                               Lava wiped         6 1/4       15.9        5.4
                              Blue Diamond        9 3/4       24.8        8.4
                                BD wiped          5 3/8       13.7        4.6
                                  Kamui          12 5/8       32.1       10.9
                              Kamui wiped         7 3/4       19.7        6.7

    The purpose for the next set of tests was to determine how many shots could be hit before miscuing after
a single application of chalk. For every shot, the center of the cue was aimed at the center of the red-circle
edge of the Elephant Practice ball to ensure a fairly consistent amount of sidespin each time. The cue was
also held in the same orientation for each shot, with a small marker at the joint pointing straight up. This
caused the same part of the tip to hit the CB on each shot. The chalk mark on the CB was completely wiped
and rubbed off with a cloth after each shot. After each miscue, the tip was scuffed and fresh chalk was re-
applied for the next set of tests.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     July, 2015
    Table 2 summarizes the results from the number-of-hits-before-miscue experiment. The Blue Diamond
and Kamui chalks took much longer to lose effectiveness. The single application of Kamui chalk lasted for
almost twice as many shots as some of the others (15 shots vs. about 8) for the amount of sidespin tested.
So if you don’t chalk before each shot, or if you don’t chalk properly, Blue Diamond, and especially Kamui,
might result in fewer miscues.

                               Table 2 Number of hits before miscue results

                                                    number of shots before
                                                           miscue
                                   chalk            left        right     average
                                   Master            6            10        8.0
                                  pre-flag            8           7         7.5
                                    Lava              7          10         8.5
                               Blue Diamond          10          11         10.5
                                   Kamui             16          14         15.0

    The purpose for the final set of tests was to determine how long chalk marks stay on the CB after multiple
shots. The longer chalk marks persist, the greater the chance cling will occur. The same three-rail kick shot
with top-right english was repeated six times with each chalk. The CB was positioned each time so if the
chalk marks persisted, they would all be in the same general area on the ball. After the 6 shots, the chalk
marks were observed carefully and categorized as either “clearly visible,” “faint” or “very faint.”

    Table 3 summarizes the results from the chalk mark persistence test. Both the Blue Diamond and Kamui
chalks seem to stick to the CB more and be retained longer. After 6 shots, the chalk marks from the last 5
shots were still clearly evident and at risk for cling. Therefore, one would expect cling to be more likely with
the Blue Diamond and Kamui chalks, especially if the CB is not wiped clean often.

                                  Table 3 Chalk mark persistence results

                                                      chalk marks retained
                                                                         very
                                   test            clear      faint      faint
                                  Master             2          1          2
                                 pre-flag            2           2           1
                                   Lava              2           1           1
                              Blue Diamond           5           1           0
                                  Kamui              5           0           1

    One more observation concerning Kamui chalk was that it goes on the tip very smoothly with no abrasive
sound or feel at all … almost like lipstick. One possible advantage of this is that it might not wear down the tip
as fast. A possible advantage of the other chalks is that they might help keep the surface of tip slightly
scuffed, helping the tip hold chalk better.

    Here’s the bottom line conclusion from all of the experiments: The brand of chalk doesn’t really matter
much, unless you don’t chalk often or well enough, in which case the Blue Diamond and Kamui might help;
although, they can result in more frequent cling. Remember, chalk before each shot, and keep the CB as
clean as possible. Definitely wipe the CB off any time you get ball in hand, and before every game before
breaking.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         July, 2015
Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV F.1 – Pool Chalk Experiment - Does the brand really make a difference?
normal video

PS:
      •        For more information, and for results from additional testing, see the “chalk comparison resource
               page” in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-
author of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice
(VEPP),” “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD
series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         July, 2015
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/dr_dave_s_best_youtube_vids.pdf
title: Dr Dave S Best Youtube Vids
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Dr. Dave’s Best YouTube Vids”                                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu.
The reference numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

   One of my YouTube videos hit a million views recently so I thought this might be a good time to
encourage you to check it out along with others in my “Top Five” list. Here they are, along with the URLs and
numbers of views (as of 1/11/2017):

1. Pool and Billiards Bank Shot Drill for Learning Cut-Angle Effects,
   from VEPP IV (NV C.14)

                                        URL: https://youtu.be/s_8Mu0lIyFg
                                                views: 1,027,753

                                Diagram 1 Number One Top Dr. Dave Video

    This video is an excerpt from Disc IV of the "Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice" (VEPP) instructional
DVD series. It describes, illustrates, and demonstrates drills for practicing how to adjust bank shot aim to
account for various cut-angle, speed and spin effects. The image in Diagram 1 shows how to use english to
transfer spin to the object ball (OB) to lengthen the rebound, allowing for a thinner hit to avoid a double kiss.
The yellow path is the double kiss path with no spin, and the red path shows how right (counterclockwise)
sidespin on the cue ball (CB) transfers left (clockwise) sidespin to the OB making it bank longer to the pocket
… assuming the amount of sidespin, speed, and cut angle are appropriate for the shot and the table
conditions.

2. Pool Bank and Kick Shot Terminology and Aiming Systems,
   from VEPS IV (NV B.81)

Billiards Digest                                                                                      March, 2017
                                    URL: https://youtu.be/GaWnmePhmuA
                                              views: 614,751

                              Diagram 2 Number Two Top Dr. Dave Video

    This video is an excerpt from Disc IV of the "Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots" (VEPS) instructional DVD
series. The clip describes, illustrates, and demonstrates bank and kick shot terminology along with several
basic bank and kick shot aiming systems. The image in Diagram 2 shows how to use two-to-one through-
diamond reference tracks to aim a slow-rolling bank shot. Here, the OB lies directly on one of the reference
tracks, so the shot is a piece of cake … assuming the shot is hit softly along the reference line with no
sidespin (and assuming you are not playing on Diamond tables, which usually bank short).

3. Pool Break Shot Technique Advice - How To Break,
   from Vol-III of the BU instructional DVD series

Billiards Digest                                                                                  March, 2017
                                   URL: https://youtu.be/Av2DNdWzziA
                                            views: 562,314

                              Diagram 3 Number Three Top Dr. Dave Video

    This video is an excerpt from Disc III of the Billiard University (BU) instructional DVD series. The clip
describes, illustrates, and demonstrates how to add power to your break while maintaining consistency and
accuracy. The image in Diagram 3 shows how to use a slightly above-center hit on the CB to “squat the
rock” after the break. The weight of the rack of balls makes the CB bounce back, and the slight top spin is
required to slow the CB so it stops in the center of the table … assuming you have accurate aim and enough
control to hit the 1-ball squarely.

4. Cut-Induced Throw (CIT) and Spin-Induced Throw (SIT) in Pool and Billiards,
   from VEPS IV (NV B.86)

Billiards Digest                                                                                   March, 2017
                                    URL: https://youtu.be/-jUL_8aZ2LU
                                             views: 491,658

                              Diagram 4 Number Four Top Dr. Dave Video

    This video is an excerpt from Disc IV of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots" (VEPS) instructional DVD
series. The clip describes, illustrates, and demonstrates cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw
(SIT) and how to adjust aim to compensate for these effects for a wide range of shot types. The image in
Diagram 4 shows how to use CIT to push the 3 toward the pocket along a line (red) not possible without
throw due to the position of the blocking 4 (which limits the minimum cut to the yellow line). Here, the
maximum amount of throw is created with a soft speed stun shot (where the CB has no top or bottom spin).
The shot is fairly easy … assuming your speed is soft enough, and you don’t overcut the ball, and the CB is
close to stun at impact.

5. 30-Degree Rule and Peace Sign for Visualizing the Cue Ball Natural Angle,
   from VEPS-I (NV B.66)

Billiards Digest                                                                                  March, 2017
                                     URL: https://youtu.be/JgKD-nqKTlQ
                                              views: 469,226

                                Diagram 5 Number Five Top Dr. Dave Video

    This video is an excerpt from Disc I of the "Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots" (VEPS) instructional DVD
series. The clip describes, illustrates, and demonstrates how to apply the 30º rule and Dr. Dave peace-sign
technique to a wide range of rolling-cue-ball pool shots, where the cue ball heads in the natural-angle
direction. The image in Diagram 5 shows how the maximum CB deflection angle occurs close to a ½-ball hit,
and the graph inset shows how the CB deflection angle is very close to 30º over a very wide range of cut
angles. The rule is very useful to help you avoid scratches, get position, aim carom and billiard shots, and
plan break-out and avoidance shots … assuming you have your peace-sign hand well calibrated and have a
good feel for how to adjust your hand placement based on the speed of the shot.

   Did you notice all of the “… assuming …” statements at the ends of the shot-description paragraphs
above. Pool is not just about knowledge … accurate and consistent execution is also critically important.

    I hope enjoy and benefit from these videos after you view them online. And if you do, you might also
want to check out more of the several hundred billiards videos I have posted online. You can find them by
going to my YouTube Channel at https://www.youtube.com/DrDaveBilliards and clicking on the Videos tab.
And while you are there, hit the subscribe button (and click on the notification bell) so you will know when I
post new videos.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards book and DVD, and co-author of
the Video Encyclopedias of Pool Shots (VEPS), Pool Practice (VEPP), and Eight Ball (VEEB), and
the How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS) and Billiard University (BU) instructional DVD series, all
available at: DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   March, 2017
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/dr_dave_schools_neil_degrasse_tyson.pdf
title: Dr Dave Schools Neil Degrasse Tyson
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Dr. Dave Schools Neil deGrasse Tyson”                                      ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Recently, I was invited to be the featured guest on a podcast with the famous astrophysicist Neil
deGrasse Tyson (see Image 1). Neil’s podcast series, called StarTalk Sports Edition, deals with the science
of sports, and the topic of this episode was billiards physics. The podcast was co-hosted by Tyson, comedian
Chuck Nice, and past pro soccer player Gary O’Reilly.

                          Image 1 Shortened/illustrated podcast video title screen

     We discussed a wide range of billiards topics in the podcast, including:

     •    the history of pocket billiards
          The game evolved from 15th century French and British aristocrats moving croquet indoors and
          eventually onto tables.

     •    origination of the term “pool”
          The term originated from horse track betting “pools” where pocket billiards tables were introduced into
          betting rooms to give gamblers something to do between races, and to give them something else to
          bet on.

     •    origination of the term “English” (AKA sidespin)
          The term came from visits by British (“English”) players doing exhibitions in America in the early
          1800s, where they demonstrated fancy sidespin shots (“English” shots) made possible by the then-
          recent invention of the leather tip in Europe.

     •    Gustave Coriolis
          The famous mathematician and physics Coriolis wrote an amazing book in the early 1800s dealing
          with billiards physics. He also discovered the Coriolis Effect which explains how hurricanes and
Billiards Digest                                                                                     January, 2022
          galaxies form (but not why toilets flush in the direction they do, despite the common myth). Among
          many other things, Coriolis discovered how to predict and control curving cue ball (CB) paths on a
          pool table. Image 2 illustrates the Coriolis aiming system that can be used to aim massé shots. The
          line of action of the cue results in contact on the CB at point “B.” Extending this line down onto the
          table defines aim point “A” on the cloth. Finally, point “R” is the resting point of the CB on the cloth.
          Coriolis discovered that the final direction of the CB, after curving, should theoretically be parallel to
          the line through points “R” and “A.” I sometimes call the Coriolis aiming system the “BAR” method
          because contact point “B” on the ball results in aim point “A” on the cloth, and the line from resting
          point “R” predicts the final CB direction.

                                    Image 2 Coiolis or “BAR” aiming system

     •    the evolution of pool equipment
          Not much has changed in hundreds of years. We still use leather tips on mostly wooden cues;
          although, carbon fiber has recently been introduced (and is becoming quite popular) as a
          replacement to maple. Fortunately, balls are no longer made of ivory. In the shameful past of the
          sport, countless elephants were slaughtered since a single tusk typically yielded only three balls!
          Today’s synthetic phenolic resin balls are a much better and more sustainable alternative. However,
          engineers have still not been able to improve upon nature’s slate, used for the bed of the table under
          the cloth, or leather used for cue tips. When discussing the carbon fiber revolution, I explained the
          physics behind CB deflection (AKA “squirt”). As shown in Image 3, when you hit the CB on the right
          side, the CB starts to rotate counterclockwise, pushing the tip to the right during contact. Because
          the end of the shaft has mass, the tip pushes back on the CB which causes squirt to the left a little.
          Because carbon fiber shafts can be made lighter, especially at the tip end, they don’t create as much
          CB deflection.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         January, 2022
                                              Image 3 Squirt physics

     •    trick shots
          Fancy shots like jump shots and massé shots, where you curve the CB around or over an obstacle,
          involve lots of interesting physics and require well-practiced skill.

     •    sidespin physics
          Squirt, swerve, and throw, the physics effects that come with using sidespin must be understood and
          judged accurately to play at a high level.

     •    strategy
          Pool is a fun and challenging game party due to the chess-like strategy and planning required to play
          at a high level. Pool is also great because even somebody who has never played before can
          immediately enjoy the challenge and excitement of occasionally pocketing balls. When discussing 9-
          ball, I ribbed Neil about his reputation for helping to declassify Pluto as an official solar-system planet.
          I always thought it would be cool to have a ball set where each of the 9 balls looked like one of the
          nine planets (see Image 4), but Neil ruined that removing Pluto from the official list.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          January, 2022
                                         Image 4 9-planet ball-set inspiration

    If you want to watch or listen to the podcast, it is available in online video NV J.97, which a shortened
(13:57) and illustrated video version with shot examples. The video includes images, illustrations, animations,
and video demonstrations of many of the concepts being discussed. The full (52:15) unedited version of the
video podcast is available at:
    https://youtu.be/ZfxtXmnheDgi
and an edited audio-only podcast version (37:33) is available at
    https://www.startalkradio.net/show/pool-table-physics-with-dr-dave-alciatore/.

    As Dr. Neil says at the end of the podcast, no one will walk by a pool table the same way again after
watching or listening to the podcast. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.97 – Dr. Dave Schools Neil deGrasse Tyson in Billiards Physics
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     January, 2022
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/draw_for_show_follow_for_dough.pdf
title: Draw For Show Follow For Dough
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Draw for Show, Follow for Dough”                                            ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     Have you ever heard the saying: “Draw for Show, Follow for Dough?” In a recent Youtube video series (NV
L.58 and NV L.59), I show many reasons why this is good advice. Draw shots are fun and impressive, and it
is cool to make the cue ball (CB) dance around the table, but draw should usually not be your first choice when
considering CB control and position play options, as the videos demonstrate and as I summarize below.

     One reason a follow shot is a better choice is it is much easier to control CB travel distance. Image 1 shows
a good drill you can use to experience this yourself. I am pocketing the 9, trying to follow forward for shape on
the 8. I expect to get shape on the 8 every time with a shot like this. Good follow control like this will help you
win games. With a similar draw shot position play instead (see Image 2), again pocketing the 9 and getting
shape on the 8 up-table, it is much more difficult. Give both drills a try to see how you do. I suspect you will
find it much easier to be accurate and consistent with the follow shot.

                                           Image 1 Follow shot drill

Billiards Digest                                      1                                                October, 2024
                                             Image 2 Draw shot drill

     It is also easier to predict and control CB carom direction with follow compared to draw. With a follow shot,
the 30° rule peace sign technique can help you accurately predict expected cue ball direction (see video NV
L.58). As demonstrated in the video, the natural angle for rolling-CB follow shots is very reliable, even with
slight errors in aim, tip position, and shot speed. Image 3 shows a good practice shot for draw. Using the 3-
times-the-angle system, I can accurately predict where a “good action” draw shot should head, in this case,
toward the 8-ball. It is helpful to drill a shot like this to test accuracy and consistency. If you try the drill, I am
sure you will find it is much more difficult to control CB direction with draw compared to follow. Any slight
changes in tip position, speed, or aim make big differences in CB direction.

                                        Image 3 Draw shot pocket cheat

Billiards Digest                                        2                                                 October, 2024
    Tip height obviously has a big effect on draw shot CB control. If the tip isn’t low enough, the CB comes up
well short of the target. “Good action” draw requires a very low tip; although, it is possible to draw more than
the “good action” prediction if the tip is even closer to the miscue limit.

     Shot speed is also important. Many people think using more speed, resulting in more backspin, will cause
the CB to draw back at a tighter angle. But, as demonstrated in the video, many people are wrong. If you use
too little speed, backspin will wear off on the way to the object ball (OB). If you use too much speed, backspin
is retained, but the CB persists along the tangent line longer before curving. The fast speed causes the CB to
peel out, delaying the curve. To achieve the expected 3-times-the-angle “good action-draw” CB direction, you
need to use a “Goldilocks” amount of medium speed, where very little backspin is lost on the way to the OB,
and the CB curves soon enough.

      The biggest issue with accurate and consistent draw shot CB direction control is precise aiming. If you
cheat the pocket in either direction from center, the resulting CB direction will be radically different. For
example, in Image 3, if I target the right side of the pocket with a full hit, the cut angle is smaller, and 3-times
that angle sends the CB well above of the target pocket (see the upper white line). Cheating the pocket to the
left instead with a thinner hit results in a much larger cut angle, and 3-times that angle sends the CB well below
the target pocket (see the lower white line). With the tip low enough, and targeting the center of the pocket
instead, the CB heads in the expected direction. In the video, I used the same low tip position and stroke on
each of these three shots, and I pocketed the ball each time, but the CB headed in radically different directions.
Again, CB direction is much more difficult to control with draw as compared to follow.

      When you have ball in hand after an opponent foul, follow is often the better choice. In Image 4, I need to
pocket the 11 and get a shot at the 8, inside the white-line shape zone. I could put the CB to the right of the 11
and attempt to draw straight back, but it is easy to come up short. And if you attempt to use more speed to
come off the side rail, it is also easy to go long, especially if you cross the narrow part of the shape zone close
to the 1. And if you attempt to draw closer to the side pocket, where the shape zone for the 8 is wider, you
might scratch by mistake because it is very difficult to control draw shot direction. Placing the CB on the short
side of the 11 instead for a longer follow shot (as shown) is much more reliable in this situation. It is very easy
to control follow distance. It is also much easier to control follow direction, making it safer to come closer to the
side pocket, where the margin for error is bigger in the wide part of the shape zone for the 8. And even if you
don’t want to risk coming that close to the side pocket, you can safely target the middle of the shape zone since
it is so easy to control follow distance.

                                            Image 4 Precision follow

Billiards Digest                                       3                                                October, 2024
      Other factors that make draw shot accuracy and control much more difficult than follow shots include:

           •       Because a low tip is required for good draw, a miscue is always a concern, especially if you tend
                   to tense up during the stroke.

           •       At the fast speed often required for draw shots, the pockets play smaller and the ball can rattle out
                   if you don’t hit the pocket cleanly. Also, it is more difficult to remain accurate and consistent when
                   we add more power.

           •       Draw shots are also much more sensitive to variations in cloth conditions. Backspin wears off due
                   to cloth friction drag on the way to the OB. And the drag action varies a lot with cloth properties,
                   ball and cloth cleanliness, and even temperature and humidity. With a rolling cue ball, no
                   judgement is required for drag uncertainty since the CB rolls immediately, making it easier to judge
                   CB travel distance.

    All the shots and drills in the videos are excellent practice, so use them to test and improve your skills. I
hope this column and online videos NV L.58 and NV L.59 help reinforce the insightful saying: “Draw for Show,
Follow for Dough!”

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                     NV L.58 – Master Cue Ball Control … FOLLOW VS. DRAW
   normal video      NV L.59 – DRAW VS. FOLLOW Position Play Examples … Follow is not Always Better

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                             4                                               October, 2024
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/draw_shot_control.pdf
title: Draw Shot Control
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Draw Shot Control”                                                            ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

   Do you want to be able to draw the cue ball (CB) with accuracy and consistency? In a recent online video
(NV L.27) I presented and demonstrated everything you need to be more effective and successful when using
backspin. This column summarizes the important points from the video.

     Obviously, if you do not have good draw stroke technique, you will not be accurate and consistent. If you
need help with this, see online video NV J.33, which covers the ten most important elements: chalk up, aim low
on the CB, check cue alignment and tip placement with a purposeful eye pattern, keep the cue as level as
possible, pull the cue back slowly, accelerate smoothly, keep your grip relaxed, be still, don’t drop your elbow
into the CB, finish the stroke without deceleration. For help and more info, see the draw shot advice resource
page at billiards.colostate.edu. You need solid draw stroke fundamentals to take best advantage of the
techniques and advice in the remainder of this column, so practice the fundamentals stuff first.

     One important piece of advice for effective draw is to use a low tip to create backspin with the least effort
and most control. This advice also applies to stop shots. As demonstrated in NV L.27, one option for a short
stop shot is to hit the CB in the center with fast speed. The problem with this is if the aim is off, even slightly,
the CB will travel far from the ideal stop-shot position. The other problem with fast speed is if the tip is only a
hair too high or a hair too low, the CB will follow forward or draw back quite a bit. If you instead use a very low
tip (see Image 1), with much less speed, you will have much better stop shot accuracy, consistency, and control.
The CB starts off with backspin, but the spin wears off on the way to the object ball (OB) to create stun, giving
a stop shot. Unlike with the fast-speed stop shot, a small error in aim or tip position will have only a small effect
at slow speed. Remember, “Low and Slow is the Way to Go” to go with stop shots. And this advice also
applies to most draw shots.

                                 Image 1 Low tip position for controlled draw

    If you use the same non-rushed and smoothly-accelerating stroke for every shot, you can control draw
distance simply by varying your stroke length. In fact, this is a good approach for speed control in general. A
good drill to develop and improve your draw distance control is shown in Image 2. The shot is straight into the
side with the OB close to the pocket. The goal is to draw the CB increasing and controlled distances. I mark
each target draw distance with a golf tee. Use the same low tip position for every shot. If you start with a very
short stroke, you won’t generate much cue speed and all the backspin will wear off on the way to the OB. If
you get within a ball or two of the target draw distance, call that good since it is difficult to do better; otherwise

Billiards Digest                                        1                                                   May, 2024
keep trying before moving the target. Gradually increase the stroke length to create more speed to retain more
backspin, with the eventual goal of scratching in the opposite side. It is difficult to aim and stroke perfectly,
especially as you add more stroke length and shot speed. But if you aim carefully, check the tip position
carefully, keep the grip relaxed, and accelerate smoothly, your accuracy and consistency will be much better.
After scratching in the side, try to scratch with even more draw speed, lengthening your bridge if necessary and
using your entire bridge length during the stroke.

                             Image 2 Vary stroke length for draw shot control

     An alternative way to control draw distance is to use a consistent stroke length and speed and just vary the
tip height (see Image 3). This approach works well only if the CB is fairly close to the OB. Everything is easier
when the OB is close since you don’t need as much stroke speed to retain backspin. Accurate aim is also
easier with the OB close. For a stop shot, the tip can be close to center ball. To draw back about a diamond,
the tip only needs to be a little below center. And lowering the tip more gives more draw distance. Try this as
a drill also, gradually increasing the draw distance.

                           Image 3 Vary tip height for short-range draw control

Billiards Digest                                     2                                                  May, 2024
     Image 4 illustrates a technique that might help some people visualize desired draw distance. First, you
need to be able to judge the tip position and cue speed required for stop shots at different distances.
Remember, low and slow is the way to go for accurate and consistent stop shot control over a large distance
range. Practice a stop shot a few times with the OB close to the pocket to make sure your tip height and speed
judgement are correct. There is a rule of thumb that says if you stroke like you are trying to get a stop shot a
certain distance past the OB, the draw amount will be roughly that distance (see Image 4). The farther the OB
is from the stop shot position, the more draw you will get. Gradually move the OB closer to the CB, trying to hit
all shots just like the original stop shot at full distance, and see how well the draw distance compares to the OB
distance from the original-stop-shot position. The rule of thumb isn’t perfect, and results will vary some with
cloth slickness and speed, but the rule still might be useful for some people to help them visualize and control
draw distance.

                                       Image 4 Draw distance rule of thumb

    I hope the advice and techniques in this video help you become more accurate and consistent with draw
shot control. Everything requires feel, and the only way to develop and improve that is with practice, so get to
the table and start working on the shots and drills. Check out online video NV L.27 first since everything is
demonstrated in detail.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV J.33 – Top 10 Secrets of a Good Draw/Backspin/Screw-Back Shot
   normal video
                   NV L.27 – DRAW SHOT CONTROL … How to Be Accurate and Consistent Using Backspin

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                         3                                                   May, 2024
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/draw_shot_cue_ball_directions.pdf
title: Draw Shot Cue Ball Directions
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Draw Shot Cue Ball Directions”                                             ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and technical proofs (TP),
and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference
numbers used in my articles will help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or
inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details
can be found online at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     Last month, we looked at several systems useful for predicting the direction the cue ball (CB) heads after
striking the object ball (OB). These systems apply only for follow shots, where the CB is rolling into the OB.
This begs an obvious question: Do such systems exist for draw shots also? The answer is yes, and that’s
the topic of this article.

     In my March ’06 article, I presented the trisect (3X) system, which is very useful for predicting CB
direction with “good-action” draw shots. As illustrated in Diagram 1, the trisect system predicts that the final
CB direction angle, relative to the original CB direction, will be three-times the cut angle. NV B.67 illustrates
how you can use your hand to visualize both the cut angle (A) and 3-times the angle (3A). Alternatively, as
illustrated by the small cues and blue arcs in Diagram 1, you can use your cue to estimate the angle by
rotating it from the line of aim to the line-of-centers, and then rotating it the same amount two more times to
find the predicted CB direction. For more info and demonstrations of the trisect system, see “draw” in the
FAQ section of my website.

                                        Diagram 1 trisect (3X) system

    As indicated in Diagram 1, the trisect system applies only for cut angles in the 0˚-40˚ range. This
corresponds to ball-hit fractions greater than about 3/8. NV B.67 demonstrates how you can use your hand to
estimate the maximum cut angle for which the trisect system applies. For most people, if you stretch your
peace sign fairly hard, the angle will be very close to 40˚. Another requirement of the trisect system is that the
CB must have a typical “good action” amount of backspin, which is illustrated in Diagram 2. If you aim the
center of the CB through the edge of the OB, a “good action” amount of backspin will send the CB
perpendicular to (90˚ from) its original direction. Reflecting back on Diagram 1, the trisect system predicts this

Billiards Digest                                                                                    December, 2011
because aiming center to edge creates a ½-ball hit, which is a 30˚ cut angle, and 3 × 30˚ = 90˚. As shown in
Diagram 2, it is possible to get slightly more draw than this if you really push the miscue limit. It is also easy
to get less draw if you hit the CB too high or don’t use enough speed. Before applying any of the systems in
this article, you first need to practice this shot to develop a feel for “good action” draw. The systems in this
article apply on for “good action” draw shots. If you have too much backspin, the CB will draw back at a
tighter angle than predicted; and if you too little, the CB will draw back at a wider angle (closer to the tangent
line). Note also that the required tip offset on the CB will vary some with shot speed and distance, and with
table conditions. With more distance between the CB and OB, you will need to hit lower on the CB; and if the
shot is too long, it might not be difficult to achieve a “good-action” amount of draw (especially on a “sticky”
cloth).

                                    Diagram 2 Typical “good action” draw

     The trisect system isn’t perfect over its entire range. Recently, I did an analysis to try to find alternative
systems that work better over different cut-angle ranges, including thin hits beyond the trisect system range.
If you like math and physics, check out TP B.14 on my website. If you don’t, you still might benefit from the
useful results summarized below.

     Diagram 3 illustrates a system that works better for full-hit draw shots, in the 0˚-10˚ range (i.e., greater
than about a 7/8-ball hit). This system is called the double-bisect or 4X system. It works just like the trisect
(3X) system, but the predicted angle to the final CB direction is four-times the cut angle from the original
direction instead of three. With full hits, the trisect system predicts a tighter angle than is typical with a “good
action” draw shot (see the red path in the diagram). The trisect system works better for larger angles, up to
40˚, and is most accurate closer to a 30˚ cut. The double-bisect system doesn’t work very well beyond about
10˚.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     December, 2011
                                Diagram 3 full-hit double-bisect (4X) system

     Diagram 4 illustrates a system that works for thin-hit draw shots, in the 40˚-90˚ range (i.e., less than
about a 3/8-ball hit). This system is called the 30-minus-1/3 system. It is a little more complicated than the
other two systems, but it works quite well. With really thin hits (close to a 90˚ cut), the CB does not draw back
from the tangent line very much, regardless of the amount of backspin. As the ball-hit fraction increases, the
amount the CB draws back from the tangent line also increases. To find the exact amount, first visualize a
line 30˚ above the tangent line. As illustrated by the hand in the diagram, you can use your 30-degree-rule
peace sign to find this line. Then visualize 1/3 of the cut angle (A/3) and subtract this from the 30 degree
direction, bringing the line closer to the tangent line. This direction will fairly accurately predict the final CB
angle for cuts in the 40˚-90˚ range. Note that for a really thin hit close to a 90˚ cut angle, the system correctly
predicts that the CB would head straight down the tangent line [30˚ – 1/3(90˚) = 0˚].

                                   Diagram 4 thin-hit 30-minus-1/3 system

Billiards Digest                                                                                    December, 2011
    There is another system to very accurately predict final CB direction for cut angles between 20˚ and 40˚,
but since the trisect system does reasonably well over this range, the additional system really isn’t necessary.
But if you’re curious, see the details in TP B.14.

     Don’t forget that with both follow and draw shots, the CB persists along the tangent line longer at higher
speeds before curving to the final direction, as demonstrated in NV B.45 and HSV B.23. For more
information, see “CB path speed effects” under “position control” in the FAQ section of my website. To use
the systems in this article (and last month’s article) effectively, you need to know how to make adjustments for
speed.

                    NV B.45 – Cue ball path speed effects
normal video
                    NV B.67 – The trisect system for draw shots, from VEPS I

                    HSV B.23 – Cue ball path speed, spin, and cue elevation effects
high-speedvideo

                    TP B.14 - Draw shot cue ball angle approximations
technical proof

    I hope you find the draw-shot CB-direction systems useful in your game. Be sure to try them out the next
time you play. Remember, the trisect (3X) system works well over a fairly wide range (0˚-40˚ cuts), the
double-bisect (4X) system works better for thick hits, and the 30-minus-1/3 system works for thin hits. Most
cut shots in pool are in the 0˚-40˚ range (when you are playing well), making the trisect system very useful, so
be sure to dedicate some practice time to learning how to use it effectively.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •      I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
             familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
             please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD: “High-speed
Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                  December, 2011
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/draw_shot_physic_part_iii_spin_ratio.pdf
title: Draw Shot Physics - Part III: spin ratio
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Draw Shot Physics - Part III: spin ratio”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the third article in a series on draw shot physics. In the previous two months, we
looked at the basics, listed a set of conclusions from a physics analysis (TP B.8), and looked at
some practical examples where the conclusions are useful. With a straight-on (0° cut angle) draw
shot, the draw distance is determined solely by the amount of spin the cue ball (CB) has when it
hits the object ball (OB). Last month, we looked at how the CB’s spin changes due to “drag” on
the way to the OB. Clear demonstrations of this can be viewed in HSV 3.1 and NV B.10. For a
draw shots with a cut angle (i.e., not straight in), both the speed and spin on the CB are important
factors. With some shots, it is important to have a lot of CB spin but not too much forward speed
to get the best result (e.g., position for the next shot). When the CB has lots of spin and less
speed, it is said to have a high spin-to-speed ratio, which is the focus of this month’s article.

                   TP B.8 – Draw shot physics
technical proof

                   HSV 3.1 – Stop-shot showing loss of bottom spin over distance
high-speed video

                   NV B.10 – Drag spin loss and English persistence
normal video

     I recently extended the analysis in TP B.8 to look at both CB spin and spin-to-speed ratio.
The gory details can be found in TP B.9, if you’re interested in that sort of thing. I know most of
you probably aren’t interested in the math and physics, but I hope most of you will be interested in
some of the results. Diagram 1 is a graph that illustrates the general trends. The horizontal
scale indicates how far the cue tip is offset from the center of the CB. The extreme left side
corresponds to no offset (0%); and the extreme right side corresponds to maximum tip offset
(100%) at the miscue limit. The vertical scale indicates the amount of spin and spin-to-speed
ratio the CB has when it hits the OB, both of which are reduced by cloth “drag” along the way to
the OB. Generally, to get more spin at contact with the OB, you must hit the CB harder and
lower. This is the case with the red curve in the diagram, which corresponds to shots where the
CB is not very far from the OB. As you increase tip offset (i.e., as you move to the right in the
diagram), the amount of spin at the OB increases (i.e., the curve keeps going up) until you
approach the miscue limit, where the curve levels off (see the right side of the red curve). The
green curve shows that for shots where the OB is farther away, the maximum CB spin at OB
contact occurs at about 80% tip offset. As you increase the tip offset beyond this (closer to the
miscue limit), the amount of spin the CB has when it hits the OB is actually less. This was
described and illustrated in detail last month, but to summarize: hitting the CB farther from center
gives the CB more initial spin but less initial forward speed. With less forward speed, the drag
action of the cloth has more time to slow the CB’s spin, and the CB ends up with less spin as it
arrives at the OB.

Billiards Digest                                                                          June, 2009
                  CB spin and spin ratio at OB contact
                                                           high
                                                                                                                              b
                                                                                                  spin ratio with
                                                                                                   shorter drag
                                                                      spin with                      distance           spin with
                                                                     shorter drag                                     longer drag
                                                                       distance                                         distance
                                                          medium
                                                                                                                      a

                                                                                                  spin ratio with
                                                                                                   longer drag
                                                                                                     distance
                                                           low

                                                                 0%                 25%       50%               75%              100%
                                                             (center ball)                                                   (miscue limit)

                                                                                          tip offset

                                                                    Diagram 1 Spin and spin ratio vs. tip offset

                                                         TP B.9 – Draw shot spin vs. spin ratio
technical proof

      The blue and orange curves in Diagram 1 show how the spin-to-speed ratio of the CB (when
it hits the OB) varies with tip offset. It turns out that the this ratio always increases with increasing
tip offset; so for shots where the spin ratio is important (an example will be shown below), it does
help to hit the CB as low as possible, close to the miscue limit. Points “a” and “b” in the diagram
suggest good advice for the two pool shots illustrated in Diagram 2. Shot “a” is a power draw
shot, where the CB is far from the OB and you want to draw the CB straight back a long distance
to get position for the 2-ball shot. The location of the 3-ball and the straightness of the shot
demand power draw in this situation. This is not an easy shot, but sometimes a power draw is
the best or only option. Point “a” in Diagram 1 implies that the best strategy for this type of shot is
to hit the CB firm with the tip contact point at about 80% of the miscue limit (see last month’s
article for illustrations). As pointed out above, hitting the CB any lower would result in less draw
for a given cue speed on this shot and create a greater risk for miscue. Shot “b” is what I call a
quick-draw shot. Here, the goal is to have the CB draw back away from the tangent line
direction as soon as possible to get the CB to head straight up table for decent position on the 5-
ball shot. With the final CB position shown, the 5-ball shot is easy, and it leads to automatic
position for the follow-up 6-ball shot. With this type of shot, where there is a cut angle, the more
speed the CB has, the longer it will persist along the tangent line before the draw “takes.” For
shot “b,” we need to have ample CB spin for good draw action, but not too much CB speed. In
other words, we need a high spin-to-speed ratio. With too great a speed, the CB would head into
the side rail more directly and the CB would then rebound across table to the wrong side of the 5-
ball. Point “b” in Diagram 1 implies a high-spin-ratio quick draw is achieved by hitting the CB as
low as possible (with the largest possible tip offset at the miscue limit), using less cue speed. NV
B.47, NV B.25, and NV B.26 show several good game situation examples where more spin and
less speed (for a higher spin-to-speed ratio) is the right play. I filmed these videos last year with
fellow BD columnist Tom Ross. Check them out.

Billiards Digest                                                                                                                              June, 2009
                                                                                   1

                                     fast        a) power draw
                         3           medium
                   2                 slow

                              80% tip offset                     100% tip offset
                                                                                         5
                                                                         fast
                                                                         medium
                                                                         slow

                                                 b) quick draw

                               4                                                         6

                                    Diagram 2 Power draw vs. quick draw

                       NV B.25 – Using draw and English to beat a scratch in a side pocket
                       NV B.26 – Draw shots near a rail
normal video           NV B.47 – Draw shot off a rail requiring slower speed for position

     Diagram 3 illustrates more examples of how CB speed and spin affect the path of the CB.
Demonstrations of these effects can also be viewed in HSV B.23 and NV B.45. The black arrow
in the diagram shows the stun shot (AKA “stop shot at an angle”) path. Here, the CB is struck
slightly below center at medium speed resulting in stun (no top or bottom spin) at the 3-ball. In
this case, the CB heads straight down the tangent line of the shot. The orange curve shows the
quick-draw path, where the maximum tip offset is used to create a high spin-to-speed ratio. Here
medium speed is used to limit motion down the tangent line in order to get the CB up table with
as little sideways drift as possible. The purple curve shows what would happen if more speed
were used with the same tip offset. The CB persists along the tangent line longer and doesn’t
draw as quickly. The red and blue curves show a similar effect, but this time with less CB bottom
spin. All of this illustrates the tremendous amount of CB control we have with typical draw shots.
Unfortunately, it also shows how easily it is to miss the intended path because the range of
possible paths is so wide. If pool were easy, it wouldn’t be as fun ... right?

Billiards Digest                                                                             June, 2009
                                       tangent            fast
                                         line             medium                  fast
                              fast
                                                          slow                    medium
                              medium
                                                                                  slow
                              slow

                                                                              fast
                                fast
                                                                              medium
                                medium
                                                                              slow
                                slow

                          stun shot                                  quick-draw shot

                                           3

                                Diagram 3 Draw shot speed and spin effects

                      HSV B.23 – cue ball path speed, spin, and cue elevation effects
high-speed video

                      NV B.45 – Cue ball path speed effects
normal video

   Well, I hope you enjoying and benefitting from my series of articles dealing with draw shot
physics. Next month, I will conclude the series by looking at the effects of cue elevation.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        If you want to refer to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access them
               online at billiards.colostate.edu.
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, impact
               line, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
               come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
               glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                  June, 2009
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/draw_shot_physics_part_i_basics.pdf
title: Draw Shot Physics - Part I: basics
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                                ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Draw Shot Physics - Part I: basics”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

    Different people have different personal “Holy Grails” in pool. Most covet accurate aim and
alignment, and an accurate and consistent stroke. Many people want (or should want) perfect
speed control. Mastery of the draw shot is also on many people’s list. The draw shot is an
elusive skill for many novice players, and intermediate and advanced players constantly strive to
improve control and power. I actually already wrote and entire series of articles on the draw shot
(see my January ’06 through July ’06 articles). The focus of that series was on providing basic
technique advice, presenting drills for improving your draw stroke, and predicting CB direction for
draw shots with a cut angle. In this series, we will delve more into the physics of draw shots to
better understand the best approach in different situations. For general advice on how to improve
your draw shot technique, refer to my May '06 article and articles, advice, and drills under “draw”
the FAQ section of my website.

    First, let’s review some basics and terminology. Diagram 1 shows how tip contact point, tip
offset, and cue elevation relate to each other. The tip contact point (see Diagram 1b) is where
the cue tip comes into contact with the cue ball (CB). The tip offset (see Diagram 1b) is the
distance between the line of action of the cue (through the contact point) and the center of the
CB. Notice that when the cue is elevated (see Diagram 1d), the tip offset is still defined the same
way. Obviously, with a draw shot, where the CB comes back toward the shooter, you need to hit
below the center of the ball to give the CB backspin. However, if you use too much tip offset, or if
your tip is not properly chalked, a miscue can result (see NV 2.1 and HSV 2.1). The miscue limit
(see Diagram 1a) refers to the maximum safe tip offset to avoid miscuing. The limit is generally
accepted to be at half the ball radius (0.5 R). It just so happens that most ball manufacturers use
a radius-wide stripe on balls 9 through 15, so you can use a striped ball when practicing “how low
you can go” (see Diagram 1a). Many people designate the amount of tip offset (when applying
English, draw, or follow) with a number of “tips.” However, my January '08 and July '06 articles
explain and illustrate why “tips of English,” which depends on shaft size and tip radius (see
Diagram 1c), can be confusing and misleading. I prefer to use a percentage instead. If the tip
offset is at the miscue limit (half the ball radius), that is 100% tip offset (or English). If the tip
offset is halfway to the miscue limit (one quarter the ball radius), that is 50% tip offset (or English).
In Diagram 1c, I illustrate 80% tip offset as another example. Notice how subtle the difference is
between 80% and 100%.

Billiards Digest                                                                               April, 2009
                            miscue             stripe
                             limit             width                         tip                       tip offset
                                                                           contact
                                                                            point
                   R

           0.5R
                                           R            9                                    9              0.25R
   cue

                       a) 100% tip offset                                        b) 50% tip offset

     shaft           tip
     size          radius
                                     9           0.4R
                                                                 cue                        9
                                                              elevation
                                                                                                        tip offset

                       c) 80% tip offset                                  d) elevated cue, 50% tip offset

                                         Diagram 1 Tip offset and miscue limit

                       NV 2.1 – Miscue due to off-center hit with no chalk
normal video

                       HSV 2.1 – Miscue due to off-center hit with no chalk
high-speed video

     Diagram 2 shows the various phases that occur during a draw shot. The cue strikes the cue
ball (CB) with a certain cue speed and tip offset. This gives the CB forward speed (CB speed
1) and backspin (CB spin 1). For a center-ball hit (i.e., no tip offset), the ball speed would be
about 30%-40% greater than the cue speed, because the cue is about 3-times heavier than the
CB (see TP B.8). As the tip offset is increased, more of the cue’s energy goes into providing CB
backspin. As a result, CB forward speed (CB speed 1) will be less at greater tip offsets. The CB
slides across the cloth over the drag distance to the object ball (OB). Over this distance, some
of the forward speed and backspin wears off due to friction between the ball and cloth (see HSV
3.1 and NV B.10). At contact with the OB, the CB has a slower speed (CB speed 2) and less
backspin (CB spin 2). With a slower initial CB speed, more of the backspin and speed would be
lost during drag, because the sliding friction has more time to “do its thing.” Because the CB and
OB are usually the same weight, and very efficient in collision, nearly all of the CB forward speed
(CB speed 2) is delivered to the OB (OB speed 2), and the CB momentarily stops in place (see
Diagram 2b). Because there is some friction between the balls, some of the CB backspin is lost
during the collision (CB spin 3 < CB spin 2). After the collision, the OB moves away at nearly the
approach speed of the CB (OB speed 2 = CB speed 2) and the CB remains spinning in place
momentarily. This spin is called overspin, because the CB is spinning but not moving forward as
fast as the spin wants it to. The overspin causes the CB to accelerate (i.e., develop forward
speed) as the spin wears off some. When the CB speed and spin balance (i.e., there is no longer
any sliding at the bottom of the ball), the CB has developed complete roll. In the diagram, sliding
takes place over the skid distance. For “slicker” cloth, this skid distance will be longer (i.e., it

Billiards Digest                                                                                            April, 2009
takes longer and farther for the draw to “take”). But regardless of how “slick” or “sticky” the ball
and cloth are, the CB will have the same speed (CB speed 4) after the skid phase (see TP 4.1).
Now the CB gradually slows to a stop due to what is called “rolling resistance.” If a cloth is “fast,”
there is less rolling resistance, and the CB rolls a longer distance (roll distance). The total
distance the CB draws back (total draw distance) is the sum of the skid distance and the roll
distance (“total draw distance” = “skid distance” + “roll distance”). It is easier to draw the CB on a
slick and fast cloth because there will be less drag (and less spin loss), the CB will skid farther
with the post-collision overspin, and the CB will roll farther because of less rolling resistance.

                             CB speed 1                                                       CB speed 2
                                                   CB spin 1         CB spin 2
                                                   (backspin)

                     cue speed
                                                        tip offset

                                                       drag distance

                                                      a) before collision

                                                  CB speed 4                     CB spin 3        OB speed 2
                                                                                 (overspin)      = CB speed 2
                   stopped

                                                    rolling                     CB stopped
                                                      CB                         in place

                                roll distance                   skid distance

                                          total draw distance

                                                       b) after collision

                                            Diagram 2 Draw shot physics

                       HSV 3.1 – Stop-shot showing loss of bottom spin over distance
high-speed video

                       NV B.10 – Drag spin loss and English persistence
normal video

                       TP B.8 – Draw shot physics
technical proof        TP 4.1 – Distance required for stun and normal roll to develop

Billiards Digest                                                                                                April, 2009
     I have done a complete and thorough analysis of all of the physics involved with Diagram 2.
All of the gory details, including lots of interesting graphs, can be found in TP B.8. Most pool
players won’t be very interested in all of the analysis, but many should be interested in the
results. Here are the conclusions from the analysis:
     1. Generally, to get more draw, you must hit the cue ball harder and lower. No big
        surprise here!
     2. More tip offset does not produce significantly more draw as you approach the miscue
        limit; so, generally, it is advisable to not hit too close to the miscue limit.
     3. With larger drag distances, and for a given maximum cue speed, max draw occurs at
        less than maximum tip offset (at about 70%-80% tip offset). In other words, you don’t
        get more power draw by hitting closer to the miscue limit. But as illustrated in Diagram
        1a and 1c, 80% is still fairly close to the miscue limit.
     4. In general, with a draw shot with a medium desired draw distance, a slower cue speed
        with more tip offset will result in better draw distance control than a faster cue speed
        with less offset.
     5. Stop shots are much less sensitive to tip offset position than draw shots are. In other
        words, CB position is much easier to control with a stop shot, as compared to a draw
        shot.
     6. For a short stop shot, slower speed offers slightly better control. For longer stop
        shots, faster speed appears to offer slightly better control.
     7. For stun-through (small controlled follow) and stun-back (small controlled draw), a
        firmer hit closer to center offers better CB control.
     8. It is much easier to control draw distance on a new, slick cloth than it is on a "sticky"
        cloth, especially with lower-speed shots. The statement assumes the player is equally
        well "adjusted" to each cloth condition. Any player will need to adjust when playing under
        different cloth conditions.
     9. It is easier to draw the ball on slick cloth, and faster cloth allows for greater draw
        distances.

    Next month, we will look at some of the analysis results and conclusions in more detail. I
want to thank all of the users on the BD-CCB and AZB online forums. They created excellent
discussion and debate when I first posted the results on my analysis. I also want to thank Tom
Ross, Dave Gross, and Bob Jewett for spending time with me on the phone sharing their
thoughts and perspectives on various types of shots. Their advice, insights, and ideas helped
shape my analysis and validate many of the conclusions.

      Diagram 3 shows various types of shots resulting from different cue speeds and tip offsets.
The names commonly used for each type of shot are also included. Take a look at all of the shots
in the diagram and see how tip offset and cue speed create a wide range of CB and OB motion.
The 1-ball “power draw” shot, where the CB is far from the OB, and we wish to draw the CB back
a significant distance, both fast cue speed and large tip offset are required; however, as pointed
out in conclusion 3 above, better success is achieved by backing away from the miscue limit
slightly. With the 2-ball “draw shot,” conclusion 4 suggests more tip offset and less speed offers
better draw distance control. The 4-ball and 5-ball stop shots show how you can achieve the
same CB action with radically different tip offsets and cue speeds. In this case, the different
speed affects only how far the OB travels. Conclusion 7 suggests that the 3-ball and 6-ball “drag
draw” and “roll through” shots are easier to control with more speed and less tip offset, as shown.
The 7-ball “drag follow” shot shows what causes confusion for some novice players. They think:
“If I hit below the center of the CB, the CB will draw back ... right?” Wrong, in this case. With the
slower speed, the drag (sliding friction) action of the cloth removes all backspin and causes the
CB to roll before reaching the 7-ball. The result is follow. A “drag follow” shot might be used

Billiards Digest                                                                            April, 2009
instead of a slower “roll shot” (similar to the 8-ball shot) if the table is not level or has an abused
cloth. For a desired OB speed, faster speed can be used with the “drag follow” shot (since the
ball slows during the drag) to help limit “roll off” (CB curving) due to non-ideal table conditions.

                      fast
                                                    power draw
                      medium                                                  1
                      slow

                      fast
                                                     draw shot
                      medium                             2
                      slow

                      fast
                                             “drag draw” or “stun back”
                      medium                             3
                      slow

                      fast
                                                  stop shot (slow)
                      medium                             4
                      slow

                      fast
                                                   stop shot (fast)
                      medium                             5
                      slow

                      fast
                                           “roll through” or “stun through”
                      medium                             6
                      slow

                      fast
                                                     drag follow
                      medium                                                  7
                      slow

                      fast
                                             “roll shot” or “follow shot”
                      medium                                                  8
                      slow

                      fast
                                           “force follow” or “power follow”
                      medium                             9
                      slow

                   Diagram 3 Various named shots for different speeds and tip offsets

    There is a good drill you can use to help you develop and improve your “feel” for the various
shots in Diagram 3 (see the stop/follow/draw drill in the “Instructor and Student Resources”
section of my website). The only way to develop consistency is to practice; so when you are
done reading this article, go to a pool table and give me 20 (from Drill Sgt. Dr. Dave)!

    Well, I hope you look forward to the remainder of my series of articles dealing with the draw
shot. In future months, we will look at more details and examples for the conclusions above, the
effects of cue elevation, and cut angle considerations.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   If you want to refer to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access them
          online at billiards.colostate.edu.
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, impact
          line, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever

Billiards Digest                                                                              April, 2009
          come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
          glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                    April, 2009
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/draw_shot_physics_part_ii_examples.pdf
title: Draw Shot Physics - Part II: examples
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                                                         ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Draw Shot Physics - Part II: examples”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

      This is the second article in a series on draw shot physics. Last month, we looked at some of
the basics and listed a set of conclusions from a thorough physics analysis (TP B.8). This month,
I want to present some detailed results and show some specific examples that illustrate some of
the conclusions. With a straight-on draw shot (with no cut angle), the draw distance is
determined solely by the amount of spin the cue ball (CB) has at contact with the object ball (OB).
It is important to distinguish between how much spin the CB has off the tip and how much it has
at OB contact, after some spin is lost due to “drag” on the cloth. Diagram 1 shows how much
spin the cue delivers to the CB for different tip offsets. With a small offset (i.e., close to a center-
ball hit), the CB will have very little spin (point “A”). Obviously, as you increase tip offset, the
amount of spin increases. At point “B” (at about 30% tip offset), you get about 50% of maximum
spin; and at point “C” (50% offset), you get about 75% of maximum spin. Maximum spin occurs
at the miscue limit (point “D”), but the gain in spin is smaller as you approach the miscue limit
(i.e., you only get a little extra spin by increasing the tip offset close to the miscue limit).

                                         TP B.8 – Draw shot physics
technical proof

                                           max
                                                                                                            D

                                                                            C
                   CB spin off the tip

                                          50% max
                                                                      B                   miscue
                                                                                           limit
                                                                                  tip
                                                                                contact
                                                                                 point
                                                                                                     tip
                                                                                                   offset
                                                    A

                                             0

                                                 0%             25%             50%          75%            100%
                                             (center ball)                                              (miscue limit)

                                                                          tip offset

                                                             Diagram 1 Spin vs. tip offset

Billiards Digest                                                                                                         May, 2009
      Diagram 2 shows how the CB spin and speed change during drag on the way to the OB (see
also: HSV 3.1 and NV B.10). The straight arrows in the diagram represent the CB’s forward
(translational) speed, and the curved arrows represent the CB’s spin rate (rotation). As the CB
slides across the cloth, a rubbing drag force is created. This “drag” slows both the CB’s forward
speed and spin rate, as shown in the diagram by the shortening of the arrows. The amount of CB
draw depends on how much spin the CB has when it strikes the OB. In Diagram 2a, the CB is hit
at maximum (100%) tip offset. This results in the most spin off the tip (per Diagram 1 above); but
because some the cue’s energy goes into spinning the ball, less is available to move the ball
forward, so the CB’s forward speed is less than that of a center-ball hit with the same cue speed.
Diagram 2b shows what happens with an 80% tip offset. As shown in Diagram 1, the spin will be
a little less than with the 100% offset, but the CB’s forward speed will be faster. CB speed and
spin decrease at nearly a constant rate during drag. Therefore, at a faster speed, less spin will
be lost over a given distance. In this case, the 80% offset shot results in more CB spin at OB
contact than the 100% offset shot, even though the 100% offset shot has slightly more spin to
begin with.

                              less speed,                      spin and speed
                          and a little more spin             decrease during drag

                                                                              drag force
                                                   a) 100% tip offset

                                                                                           more spin,
                           slightly less spin,            spin and speed decrease
                                                                                           resulting in
                            but more speed                 less over distance with
                                                                                           more draw
                                                                faster speed

                                                   b) 80% tip offset

                              Diagram 2 Spin and speed loss with drag

                   HSV 3.1 – Stop-shot showing loss of bottom spin over distance
high-speed video

                   NV B.10 – Drag spin loss and English persistence
normal video

    Diagram 3 shows how draw distance varies with tip offset for firm shots with medium and
large drag distances. As illustrated in the inset figure, drag distance is how far the CB travels to
the OB and draw distance is how far the CB draws back after impact. With shorter drag
distances, more tip offset produces more draw; but as the drag distance increases, the draw
distance can actually be longer with less tip offset (e.g., 80% vs. 100%), assuming enough cue
speed is being used to retain bottom spin at OB contact. Points “a” and “b” in Diagram 3
correspond to the examples in Diagram 2. With a power draw shot (long drag distance, and fast
speed for long draw distance), you will get more draw if you hit slightly above the miscue limit (at
80% tip offset) instead of at the miscue limit (100% tip offset). In other words, you don’t always

Billiards Digest                                                                                     May, 2009
get more power draw by hitting closer to the miscue limit. Increasing cue speed will always
increase the amount of draw, but increasing tip offset doesn’t always help. This is one of the
interesting conclusions summarized in last month’s article that might not have been “intuitively
obvious to all.

                   draw distance (CB spin at OB contact)     large
                                                             draw
                                                           distance
                                                                                                      medium drag
                                                                                                       distance
                                                                               draw distance

                                                           medium                    drag distance
                                                             draw
                                                           distance
                                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                                                   b
                                                                                                           long drag
                                                                                                            distance

                                                                   0%          25%                   50%               75%           100%
                                                               (center ball)                                                     (miscue limit)
                                                                                               tip offset

                                                             Diagram 3 Draw distance vs. tip offset for power shots

     Diagram 4 shows several examples that illustrate a few of the conclusions summarized last
month. The 1-ball and 2-ball shots illustrate what was just described above for a power draw
shot. The 1-ball and 2-ball shots correspond to shots “a” and “b” in Diagram 2 and points “a” and
“b” in Diagrams 3. The 3-ball and 4-ball shots illustrate how, for draw shots with medium to long
draw distance, you can generally achieve better draw distance control by hitting the CB lower and
harder rather than higher and softer. The double-headed arrows show the range of possible final
CB positions that would result from being a little off with your speed or tip offset. The 3-ball shot
shows better draw distance control (smaller range). The 5-ball and 6-ball shots illustrate CB draw
distance control for a stun-back shot, where you wish to draw the CB back only a small amount
(e.g., 1-3 inches). Here, you will generally have better distance control by hitting the CB harder
and closer to center rather than softer with a larger offset. The main reason for this is the drag
action will have much less time to affect the CB’s spin (due to the faster speed). Another possible
factor not considered in my analysis concerns the ability to judge the speed and tip offset required
for softer shots. For some people, being closer to center-ball at a faster speed will be more
comfortable and result in better stun-back distance control, regardless of the physics.

Billiards Digest                                                                                                                                  May, 2009
                   fast
                   medium                                                              1
                   slow

                                     more power draw with slightly less tip offset

                   fast
                   medium                                                               2
                   slow

                   fast
                   medium                                       3
                   slow

                   better medium draw distance control with less speed and more offset
                   fast
                   medium                                       4
                   slow

                   fast
                   medium                                               5
                   slow

                          better stun-back distance control with more speed and less offset
                   fast
                   medium                                                6
                   slow

                                             Diagram 4 Shot examples

    The analysis and examples above have considered only CB spin at OB impact. It turns out
the speed of the CB at OB impact can also be important. This speed does not affect the amount
of CB draw, but it does obviously affect the speed of the OB. For a straight-on shot, nearly all of
the CB’s forward speed is transferred to the OB. One advantage of a slower OB speed is: the
effective "size" of the pocket will be larger (see my November ’04 through January ’05 articles);
therefore, your margin for error will be larger with a softer shot. Also, with more speed, people
generally lose a little stroking line and tip-placement accuracy. Another advantage of slower
speed is: if you cut the CB a little by accident (for a straight shot), the CB won’t drift sideways as
much (e.g., if you wish to hold the CB’s position for the next shot).

    Well, I hope you look forward to the remainder of my series of articles dealing with the draw
shot. In future months, we will look at the importance of the ratio of CB spin and speed, the
effects of cue elevation, and cut angle considerations.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   If you want to refer to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access them
          online at billiards.colostate.edu.
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, impact
          line, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
          come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
          glossary on my website.

Billiards Digest                                                                              May, 2009
Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                               May, 2009
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/draw_shot_physics_part_iv_cue_elevation_effects.pdf
title: Draw Shot Physics - Part IV: cue elevation effects
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                    ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Draw Shot Physics - Part IV: cue elevation effects”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the fourth article in a series on draw shot physics. In the previous three months, we
looked at the basics, listed a set of conclusions from some physics studies, looked at some
practical examples where the conclusions are useful, and related “quick draw” to spin-to-speed
ratio. All of my past articles are available at billiards.colostate.edu. This month, we will
conclude the series by looking at the effects of cue elevation.

     Diagram 1 illustrates an important concept related to cue elevation. Diagram 1a shows a
level cue with a fairly small tip offset from center. Diagram 1b shows an elevated cue with the tip
contact point at the same height above the table (and below the ball’s center). Even though the
tip is contacting the cue ball (CB) at the same point in both diagrams, the tip offset is much larger
with the elevated cue. Tip offset is defined as the perpendicular distance between the line of
action of the cue and the center of the CB. The tip offset, not the vertical height below the
center, is what determines the amount of spin you can impart to the CB. For a given tip offset,
the only thing you can do to create more draw distance is to have more cue speed at impact with
the CB (see my April ’09 article for more info).

                                            small
                                          tip offset
                                9                                         9
                                             same contact                               max
                                              point height                           tip offset

                       a) level cue                            b) elevated cue

                          Diagram 1 Effect of cue elevation on tip offset

    Some people think that with an elevated cue, the CB will be airborne during most of the shot,
and therefore won’t be losing any spin on the way to the object ball (OB). The airborne part is
true, especially for fast speed shots, because the cue elevation drives the CB into the table
causing the ball to hop and bounce on the way to the OB. It is also true that the CB doesn’t lose
significant spin while it is airborne (because there is no friction between the CB and the cloth).
However, the CB loses significant spin during the hops, including the first hop when the CB is
driven down into the table. The more you elevate the cue, the less spin the CB will have when it
gets to the OB, for a given tip offset and cue speed. Other potential problems with adding too
much elevation include:

     1. It can be more difficult to visually align the cue with the desired aiming line of the shot.

Billiards Digest                                                                                  July, 2009
      2. If you don’t hit exactly on the centerline of the CB (either intentional or not), the CB will
         swerve and go off line more (see NV 4.14 and HSV B.10).

      3. With more speed, the CB will hop over a longer distance and possibly hit the OB while
         still bouncing; and if the CB hits the OB while airborne, the cut angle will be changed (see
         HSV B.37) and you might miss the shot.

                   NV 4.14 – English swerve due to an elevated cue
normal video

                   HSV B.10 – MOFUDAT stroke drill follow and draw effects
high-speed video   HSV B.37 – Jump shot over-cut effect and examples

    Another effect people sometimes site when claiming they can get more draw with more cue
elevation is: the CB is being trapped between the tip and table, allowing the tip to deliver more
spin. This might be true with highly elevated masse shots; however, as shown in HSV B.44, with
modest cue elevations, the CB leaves the tip well before the CB bounces off the table.

                   HSV B.44 – Cloth compression and cue ball trajectory for draw shots of various
high-speed video   elevations

    Before continuing, I want to make it clear that slight cue elevation is required on most pool
shots because the back of the cue extends over the rails, and the tip will therefore be lower than
the butt (see TP A.3). And with draw shots, a little more elevation is required, since the tip will be
even lower on the CB than with a center-ball hit. And if somebody has large hands with “plump”
fingers and a short bridge length, the cue will also need to be elevated a little more to get the tip
low enough. But this article isn’t concerned with the amount of elevation required to provide
clearance. Here, the focus is on whether or not there is a benefit to using additional elevation.

                   TP A.3 – Minimum cue elevation required for a head-spot-to-foot-spot center-
technical proof        ball-hit shot

   I recently did an analysis (TP B.10) to explore the theoretical effects of cue elevation on the
speed and spin of the CB. Here are some of the conclusions from the analysis:
      1. Elevating the cue reduces the amount of CB spin at OB contact, resulting in less
         draw distance (see my April ‘09 article for more info). The loss in spin is small for near-
         level cue elevations, but increases with more elevation (for a given cue speed and tip
         offset).

      2. Modest cue elevations (about 0-15 degrees) reduce the spin-to-speed ratio of the
         CB at OB contact, resulting in "slower" draw (see my June ‘09 article for more info).

      3. As you increase cue elevation above about 20 degrees, the spin-to-forward-speed
         ratio increases, allowing for "quicker" draw (see my June ‘09 article and Diagram 2
         below for examples and more info). An extreme example is a highly-elevated masse
         draw shot, where you create lots of backspin with very little forward speed.

Now, sometimes cue elevation is required to shoot over an interfering ball, or to avoid a double hit
when there is only a small gap between the CB and OB. And as noted in conclusion 3 above,
with larger cue elevations, better "quick draw" action can result. However, for maximum draw
distance, a level cue (or as close to level as possible) appears to be best.

Billiards Digest                                                                              July, 2009
                   TP B.10 – Draw shot cue elevation effects
technical proof

     Diagram 2 illustrates two quick-draw examples where cue elevation helps provide a larger
spin-to-speed ratio to help make the shots possible. The shot in Diagram 2a is a 9-ball example
where a run-out is unlikely due to the 6-ball on the side-pocket point. The 5-ball is also difficult to
pocket with the current CB position. Instead, a safety is played, where the CB is drawn back
behind the 7-ball and 8-ball blockers. The elevation allows for the necessary amount of draw with
limited forward speed so the 5-ball just makes it to (or close to) the end rail. Your opponent
would likely not hit the 5-ball from the tough position created; and with ball in hand, you can easily
pocket the 5-ball-9-ball combo for the win, without having to deal with the troublesome 6-ball.
This is a shot from a multi-DVD project Tom Ross and I are currently working on called “The
Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots.” The shot in Diagram 2b is an 8-ball quick-draw example.
The CB must be drawn back as soon as possible with as little sideways shift as possible. With all
of the striped balls surrounding the 8-ball, we wouldn’t want to end up on the bottom-rail side of
the 8-ball. We also wouldn’t want to bump the 8-ball too much because it would be difficult to
predict exactly where the CB and 8-ball might end up. The best shot here is to elevate to give the
CB enough spin, but not too much forward speed, to draw back quick enough to clear (or bump
slightly) the 8-ball. This creates an easy and reliable out. As in the previous example, this shot
would not be possible without fairly high cue elevation.

                                                                     6
                                        5
                             8                               a) 9-ball example
                         7

                                 fast
                                 medium
   elevated cue                  slow

                                                                                             5
                                                                                    fast
                                                                                    medium
                                                                                    slow     9
                                                                elevated cue

                                            4
                                                                    b) 8-ball example
                                                 8

                                                Diagram 2 Quick draw examples

     I have often heard people claim that added cue elevation helps them get more draw distance
(for example: “I can get more snap on the ball when I jack up.”). First of all, for shots where there
is a small gap between the CB and OB, elevating the cue is the best way to get good draw
without risking a double hit. Beyond this, here are some other possible reasons why people
might think elevation helps:

      1. If you elevate the cue and use the same tip contact point on the CB, you will get more
         draw because the effective tip offset is larger (see Diagram 1).

Billiards Digest                                                                                 July, 2009
      2. With more cue elevation, the draw can be “quicker” (see Diagram 2 and my June ‘09
         article). People might think this is “more draw.” The draw wouldn’t be as quick with a
         near-level cue cut shot, but the draw distance can be longer with a near-level-cue
         straight-in shot, with the same tip offset and cue speed.

      3. Some people might be able to generate more cue speed with a little added cue elevation.
         Maybe they can drop their elbow and use their shoulder muscles to help create power,
         while maintaining tip contact-point accuracy. Or maybe the added elevation just feels
         and/or looks better, possibly allowing for more comfort and power. More cue speed (for
         the same tip offset) will always give you more draw.

     Anytime you practice or do experiments with draw shots, it is important to verify that you are
hitting the CB where you think you are. The best way to do this is to use a marked ball (for
example, a Jim Rempe CB or an Elephant Practice ball) or a striped ball, and note the location of
the chalk mark on the ball after each shot. Just make sure you align the markings on the ball with
the line of action of the cue (for example, see the 9-ball stripe in Diagram 1b). People are often
surprised by how high the actual tip contact point is on the ball despite how low they might think
they are aiming. Sometimes, people just don’t aim low enough on the CB. Sometimes people
drop their elbow during the stroke, before tip contact. This brings the tip up, and you get less
draw. If you tighten your grip during the stroke, the tip will drop and you might scoop the CB in
the air. Always look at the mark on the CB after the shot ... the chalk mark never lies!

    Well, I hope you have enjoyed and benefitted from my series of articles dealing with draw
shot physics. Next month, I plan to start a series dealing with how to detect and prevent various
types of fouls.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   If you want to refer to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access them
          online at billiards.colostate.edu.
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, impact
          line, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
          come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
          glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                              July, 2009
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/draw_shot_primer_part_i_physics.pdf
title: Draw Shot Primer - Part I: physics
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                                    ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Draw Shot Primer – Part I: physics”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV 3.8) help you locate the resources on the
website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view
the resources offline using a CD-ROM. See the website for details.

      Over the next few months, I will be presenting a series of articles dealing with draw shot
principles. The goal is for the reader to come away with some useful information and systems for
becoming more effective at planning and executing draw shots. In my January-July, 2004 articles
(available on my website), I showed how the 90° and 30° rules are extremely useful tools in
planning stun and follow shots. Therefore, the natural question is: “Well, what about draw shots
... is there a similar rule for them?” Well, let’s start by exploring some basic physics so we can try
to come away with some useful tools.

     Unlike with the 30° rule for a natural roll follow shot, where the cue ball deflects close to 30°
over a wide range of cut angles (see NV 3.8 and my past articles), the deflected angle for a draw
shot varies quite a bit as the cut angle changes. The physics and math details to show this can
be found in TP A.20, and the results, which are probably more interesting to most people, are
shown in Diagram 1. The graph shows how much the cue ball deflects away from its original
direction for various ball-hit fractions. Diagram 2 illustrates the deflected angle for 1/4-ball, 1/2-
ball, and 3/4-ball hits. The cue ball’s final path is deflected away from its original direction (the
aiming line) by 58° for the 1/4 ball hit, 90° for the 1/2-ball hit, and 128° for a 3/4-ball hit. As you
can see, the deflected angle varies significantly as the ball-hit fraction (cut angle) changes.
That’s one thing that can make draw shot position play challenging. However, as we will see next
month, there are still some systems that will help you predict the final direction fairly reliably.

                  NV 3.8 – Using your hand to visualize the 30° rule
normal video

                  TP A.20 – The effect of spin, speed, and cut angle on draw shots
technical proof
                                         180º

             cue ball deflected angle
                                         135º

                                          90º

                                          45º

                                                               1/4              1/2         3/4            1

                                                                        ball-hit fraction

     Diagram 1 Cue ball deflected angle vs. ball-hit fraction for an average draw shot

                                                58°
                                                                                  90°

                                                                                                           128°

                                                      fast
                                                      medium
                                                      slow

            1/4-ball hit                                         1/2-ball hit               3/4-ball hit

                                        Diagram 2 Shots corresponding to the points in Diagram 1

    Diagrams 1 and 2 reveal a useful principle (see Principle 27). For an average amount of
draw, and for a 1/2-ball hit, the cue ball deflects by 90° (i.e., the final cue ball path is
perpendicular to the original aiming line direction). As has been pointed out in this magazine
before (e.g., see Bob Jewett’s November, 2000 article), this is a very useful reference to have
when trying to predict and plan cue ball motion for a draw shot.

Principle 27 Half-ball hit draw shot

The cue ball deflects 90° for a half-ball hit with an average amount of draw.

    So what is an “average” amount of draw? Well, this is a complicated question, because the
amount of cue ball backspin at impact with the object ball, which determines the amount of draw,
depends on cue tip offset (how far off center you hit the cue ball), stroke speed, condition of the
cue ball and cloth, and distance between the cue ball and the object ball. As shown in HSV 3.1,
backspin wears off with distance, especially for slower speed shots. Here’s the best answer for
what is “average”: It is the amount that results in 90° of deflection for a 1/2-ball hit. I know this
might sound like a circular definition (based on Principle 27), but it offers a good way to calibrate
yourself for shots of various distance and speed. Just hit a set of 1/2-ball hit shots at various
speeds and distances to get a feel for how much cue tip offset creates the perpendicular cue ball
deflection. Then you will have a feel for “average” draw. If you want a more technical answer to
what “average” is, see TP A.20 and TP A.12. “Average” draw corresponds to a spin rate factor of
0.625. This means the rate of cue ball backspin, at impact with the object ball, is 62.5% of the
natural roll rate of the cue ball (see TP A.12 for more information).

                   HSV 3.1 – Stop shot showing loss of bottom spin over distance
high-speed video

                   TP A.12 – The relationship between cue ball spin cue tip offset
technical proof

    Diagram 3 shows what happens when you have less or more draw than “average.” The blue
(top) curve has 25% less spin than “average,” and the cue ball does not draw as much (i.e., the
deflected angle is less than 90°). The red (bottom) curve has 25% more spin than “average,” and
the cue ball draws more than “average” (i.e., the deflected angle is more than 90°).

                                                               less draw
                                                                      fast
                                                                      medium
                                         tangent                      slow
                                           line
                                                                               fast
                                                                               medium
                                                                               slow

                                                                    fast
                                                                    medium
                                                                    slow

                                                             more draw

                                       Diagram 3 Spin effects

     Another factor to consider when predicting the final cue ball path for a draw shot is ball
speed. Diagram 4 shows the effect. As the speed is increased, the path follows the tangent line
longer before deflecting to the final cue ball direction (e.g., see NV 4.21). This effect is
summarized in Principle 28. In Diagram 4, all three shots have the same amount of draw action
(i.e., the spin rate factor is the same for all three shots). To achieve this, the cue ball must be
struck lower for the slower speed shot. This is because a larger percentage of the backspin
wears off for a slower speed shot as the ball slides across the cloth to the object ball (e.g., see
HSV 3.1). In Diagram 4, note how the deflected angle of the cue ball is 90° (i.e., the final path is
perpendicular to the original aiming line direction) for all three speeds. This is because the spin
rate factor (i.e., the amount of draw), at object ball impact, is the same for all three shots.
                                         tangent                            fast
                                           line                             medium
                                                                            slow

                                                                  fast
                                                                  medium
                                                fast
                                                                  slow
                                               medium
                                               slow

                                         Diagram 4 Speed effects

                      NV 4.21 – Delay of draw and tangent-line deviation with higher speed
normal video

Principle 28 Draw shot tangent line persistence

The faster you hit a draw shot, the longer the cue ball travels along the tangent line before it
curves to the final deflected angle.

     Well, that’s enough for the basics of draw shot physics. Next month, we’ll look at how some
of these results can be used to analyze and compare draw shot aiming systems.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access
               them online at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/draw_shot_primer_part_ii_aiming.pdf
title: Draw Shot Primer - Part II: aiming
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Draw Shot Primer – Part II: aiming”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., TP A.20) help you locate the resources on the
website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view
the resources offline using a CD-ROM. See the website for details.

    This is the second article in a series dealing with draw shot principles. Last month, we
explored some of the basic physics of draw shots. This month, we’ll look at how some of those
results can be used to analyze and compare various draw shot aiming systems.

     Diagrams 1 and 2 repeat some of the results from last month’s article. The graph in Diagram
1 shows how much the cue ball deflects away from its original direction for typical draw shots of
various ball-hit fractions. Diagram 2 illustrates the three points shown in the graph that
correspond to the cue ball angle changes for 1/4-ball, 1/2-ball, and 3/4-ball hits. The cue ball’s
final path is deflected away from its original direction (the aiming line) by 58° for the 1/4 ball hit,
90° for the 1/2-ball hit, and 128° for a 3/4-ball hit. As you can see, the deflected angle varies
significantly as the ball-hit fraction (cut angle) changes. But, if you’re like me, you might be
wondering if there is a useful aiming system to help you reliably predict the final direction for the
cue ball for any cut angle. When you see how nearly straight the curve is in Diagram 1, you can’t
help but think that there must be a system that would work fairly well over a very wide range.
Luckily, there are such systems.

                    180º

                    135º

                    90º

                    45º

                                        1/4             1/2            3/4            1

                                                  ball-hit fraction

      Diagram 1 Deflected cue ball angle vs. ball-hit fraction for an average draw shot
                            58°
                                                            90°

                                                                                        128°

                                   fast
                                   medium
                                   slow

             1/4-ball hit                   1/2-ball hit               3/4-ball hit

                  Diagram 2 Shots corresponding to the points in Diagram 1

     One fairly well known (or at least old) system for predicting the final cue ball direction for a
draw shot is the bisector-point system. It is illustrated in Diagram 3. In words, the angle bisector
between the desired final cue ball direction and the original line of centers between the cue ball
(CB) and object ball (OB) defines the aim point for the shot (point P in the diagram). A “bisector”
is a line that divides an angle in half. With point P as the aim point, the final cue ball direction will
be as shown in the diagram, after the draw action takes hold. Note that the final cue ball path is
parallel to (i.e., at the same angle as) the predicted direction. Also note that the aim point P on
the object ball is different from the contact point between the ghost ball (GB) and object ball.
                                   original line of centers

                         cut
                        angle           aiming line through bisect point P
                                                 on the object ball

                            OB
                                                      change in cue ball angle

                                   P

                              GB

                                                                     final cue
                                                                   ball direction
                                                        parallel
                                           bisector

                                                                   cue ball
                            CB                                      path

                                 Diagram 3 Bisector-point system

      In Bob Jewett’s October, 1995 BD article, he suggested an alternative method for
implementing the bisector-point system, where you divide the angle between the original line and
desired final cue ball direction by four. The necessary cut angle will be 1/4 of the total angle. I
will refer to this method as the double-bisect system. It is illustrated in the left side of Diagram 4.
It turns out that these two systems don’t agree exactly, but they give similar results over a wide
range of shots (see TP A.21). The double-bisect system disagrees with the bisector-point system
more for larger cut angles and for larger distances between the cue ball and object ball (see TP
A.21). And as we’ll see below, neither system is perfect for all cut angles. They work best for
small cut angles (see TP A.20). Despite the disagreement between the systems, they both still
have their merits. Because the bisector-point method is based on knowing the desired cue ball
draw direction, it is most useful for planning carom shots, where the final cue ball direction is the
most important concern. The double-bisect system is more useful for predicting cue ball direction
for a given cut shot. Here, you need to send the object ball to a target (at a given cut angle), but
you also need to predict the resulting cue ball motion to detect a possible scratch, avoid traffic
created by surrounding balls, break-out clusters, or just plan accurate position for the next shot. I
will look at more details and show examples of how to apply the systems next month.
                  A                                                A

                                       4A
                                                                                   3A
                               bisector
                        A                                                  A
                            double                                             trisector
                            bisector

                              Diagram 4 Double-bisect and trisect systems

                      TP A.20 – The effect of spin, speed, and cut angle on draw shots
technical proof       TP A.21 – Comparison of bisector-point and double-bisect draw systems

     The right side of Diagram 4 illustrates a system I call the trisect system. It is very similar to
the double-bisect system; but instead of dividing the shot angle into four pieces, it is only divided
into three. To apply the system, you first observe the cut angle for the shot. As summarized in
Principle 29, the cue ball’s final direction will be three-times that angle away from the initial line
from the cue ball to the object ball (see the right side of Diagram 4). As I’ll show next month, as
with the peace sign implementation of the 30° rule (see NV 3.8 and my past articles dealing with
the 30° rule), you can use your hand to help measure the cut angle and visualize the final cue ball
direction. I’m a hands-on, visual, kind of guy, so I love using my fingers, hands, and cue stick as
aiming aids at the pool table. Again, I’ll explain and illustrate this in more detail next month.

Principle 29 Trisect draw aiming system

For a typical amount of draw, the angle between the final cue ball direction and the initial line
between the cue ball and object ball is three times the cut angle.

                      NV 3.8 – Using your hand to visualize the 30° rule
normal video
     As can be seen in Diagram 5 (from TP A.20), the trisect system is more accurate than the
double-bisect system over a large range of ball-hit fractions. The double-bisect system is a little
more accurate for large ball-hit fractions (small cut angles), and both systems work poorly for
small ball-hit fractions (large cut angles), especially the double-bisect system. In general, the
trisect system provides a much better match to the exact curve. Also, the trisect system agrees
perfectly with the 90° angle predicted for a 1/2-ball hit (see last month’s article and TP A.20). It is
important to remember from last month that the exact curve shown in Diagram 5 applies only to
draw shots with a “typical” amount of draw. You might remember from last month that a “typical”
amount of draw is the amount of draw required to change the cue ball’s direction by 90° for a 1/2-
ball hit. For draw shots with a lot more or less action than “typical,” the cue ball angle will deviate
from the exact curve shown, and the trisect system may not apply as well.

                                          180º
               change in cue ball angle

                                                                           trisect
                                          135º                             system

                                          90º

                                                 exact                     double-bisect
                                                                              system
                                          45º

                                                         1/4         1/2             3/4   1

                                                               ball-hit fraction

                  Diagram 5 Comparison of the double- bisect and trisect systems

     Well, now that we’ve covered the basics of draw shot physics and how some of these results
can be used to analyze and compare draw shot aiming systems, its time to look at how all of this
can be useful in your game. Unfortunately, we’re out of space for this month, so it will have to
wait until next time. In the next three months, we’ll look at: examples of how to put the trisect
system to good use, general recommendations for good draw technique, and how the amount of
draw can be characterized by “numbers of tips.“ I hope you will look forward to reading these
articles as much as I look forward to writing them.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access
          them online at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/draw_shot_primer_part_iii_using_the_trisect_system.pdf
title: Draw Shot Primer - Part III: using the trisect system
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                          ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Draw Shot Primer – Part III: using the trisect system”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV 3.8) help you locate the resources on the
website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view
the resources offline using a CD-ROM. See the website for details.

    This is the third article in a series dealing with draw shot principles. In the last two months,
we explored some of the basic physics of draw shots and compared various aiming systems for
predicting the path of the cue ball. This month, we’ll look at the trisect aiming system in more
detail. In particular, we’ll look at an easy way to implement the system using your hand for
visualization.

     Diagram 1 illustrates the trisect system. The cut angle (A) is defined as the angle between
the aiming line and the impact line. As summarized in Principle 29, for a “typical” draw shot, with
good action, the angle between the final cue ball direction and the impact line (2A) is twice the cut
angle (A). Therefore, the total angle between the aiming line and the final cue ball direction is
three-times the cut angle (3A = A + 2A). The impact line trisects (divides by one third) the total
angle (i.e., A is 1/3 of 3A). That’s why I call the method the trisect system. It could also be called
the double-angle or twice-the-angle system since 2A is twice A. (NOTE - In last month’s article,
Principal 29 and the right side of Diagram 4 had a slight error. The angle “A” wasn’t measured
from the correct line. The angles are measured from the aiming line direction, not from the initial
line through the cue ball and object ball as shown last month for the other aiming systems. I’ve
repeated Principle 29 here with the correction made. Sorry for any confusion this might have
caused.)
                                      cut                   initial
                                     angle                cue ball
                                      "A"                 direction
                                                       (aiming line)

                   object
                    ball
                                                                   tangent
                                                                     line

                        ghost
                         ball

                            cue                                            final
                            ball                                         cue ball
                                                            2A           direction

                                               A                 line-of-centers
                                                                  (impact line)
                                                                     trisector

                                   Diagram 1 Draw shot trisect system

Principle 29 Trisect draw aiming system

For a typical amount of draw, the angle between the final and initial cue ball directions is three-
times the cut angle, and the impact line trisects the angle.

     It is important to remember from last month that the trisect draw system applies only to draw
shots with a “typical” amount of draw. You might remember from previous months that a “typical”
amount of draw is defined as the amount of draw required to change the cue ball’s direction by
90° for a half-ball hit, where the cue ball center is aimed at the edge of the object ball. For a draw
shot with less action than “typical,” the angle labeled 2A in Diagram 1 will be larger than 2A; and
for a draw shot with lots of action, the angle will be smaller than 2A. A good way to get a feel for
“typical” draw is to hit half-ball hit shots at various speeds, distances, and cue tip offsets and
observe when the resulting cue ball path angle is typical, less than typical, or more than typical
(see Diagram 4 below).

    Diagram 2 shows an example shot where the goal is to pocket the stripe in the bottom-left
corner pocket. But you also need to know (or be able to control) where the cue ball will go. We
might need to detect a possible scratch, avoid traffic created by surrounding balls, break out
clusters, or just plan accurate position for the next shot. The most important skill in pool is being
able to pocket a ball (actually, for some people, it might just be to have fun), but the second most
important skill is to be able to visualize the direction and path the cue ball will take to set up good
position for the next shot.

                                                         fast
                                                         medium
                                                         slow

                                                                      ?

                                                                      ?

                                                                      ?

                                      Diagram 2 Example shot

     As with the peace-sign implementation of the 30° rule (see NV 3.8 and my past articles
dealing with the 30° rule), you can use your hand to help measure the cut angle and visualize the
final cue ball direction for the trisect system. Diagram 3 shows how it’s done. The first step (see
hand position 1 in the diagram) is to align you index and middle fingers with the aiming line and
the desired object ball direction (the impact line). This defines angle “A” (the cut angle). The
angle vertex point shown in the top right of the diagram is defined by the intersection of the lines
through the two fingers. Your hand should be positioned so the vertex point is above the center
of the ghost ball target. The next step (step 2) is to pivot your hand in the direction of the cut,
while keeping the angle between the fingers fixed, so the aiming line finger (in this case the index
finger) is now aligned with the impact line (i.e., pivot your hand so the index finger points in the
original middle finger direction). If you have trouble visualizing where to stop the first finger, use
the cue stick (or your other hand) to mark the second finger direction before pivoting your hand to
the new position. Diagram 3 shows the second hand position offset from the first hand position
(to prevent clutter in the illustration), but in practice it is better to just pivot the hand in place. The
final step (step 3) is to repeat step 2 from the current hand position. Steps 2 and 3 rotate the
hand the total angle of 2A and the final second-finger (in this case, the middle finger) will now be
parallel to the final cue ball path (see the diagram). If the hand had been pivoted in place, the
middle finger, in the final position, would be aligned more closely with the final cue ball path. I
know all of this might sound a little complicated, but give it a try (using this paragraph and the
example in Diagram 3 for guidance). It’s actually quite easy once you get the hang of it.

                NV 3.8 – Using your hand to visualize the 30° rule
normal video

    One thing you might notice about Diagram 3 is that the final cue ball direction for this shot is
perpendicular to (i.e., 90º away from) the original (aiming line) direction. This is because the shot
happens to be a half-ball hit, which corresponds to a 30º cut angle. Remember that if a “typical”
amount of draw is used for a half-ball hit, the cue ball changes direction by 90º. So in this case,
the angle formed by the fingers is 30º. So if you have tried the peace-sign aiming method for the
30º rule (see NV 3.8) before, this shot will be an easy example to try out first. For smaller cut
angle shots the fingers will be closer together, and for larger cut angle shots the fingers will be
farther apart. (The angle vertex point, per Diagram 3, will also be in different positions for
different cut angles, but it should always be located above the center of the ghost ball.) If you
have trouble comfortably using your index and middle fingers for larger cut angles, you can use
your thumb and index fingers instead. The procedure will still be the same.

                                                             angle vertex point

                                                impact
                                                  line

                                           1

                                       2                                   final
                                   3                   parallel         cue ball
                                                                        direction

                                         A         initial cue ball direction
                      2A

             Diagram 3 Using your hand to visualize the final cue ball direction

     As an alternative to trying to visualize angles, one can use distances instead. In Bob Jewett’s
October ’04 article, he illustrated the X/2X system that uses distances instead of angles to predict
the cue ball direction. This method is easy to apply and works well for small cut angles, but it
becomes more difficult and less accurate as the cut angle increases. However, if you have
trouble visualizing angles, the X/2X system might be a better alternative for you. As with all of my
articles, Bob also has his past articles posted online for reference. My articles can be found at
billiards.colostate.edu (under “Instructional Articles”), and Bob’s can be found at
www.sfbilliards.com/articles/BD_articles.html.

     Well, by now you might be (or, at least, I hope you are) thinking: “It can’t be that easy.
What’s the catch?” Well, the catch is that the amount of draw action and the shot speed also
affect the path of the cue ball. Also, it can be difficult (and takes lots of practice) to accurately
control the amount of draw action. Diagrams 4 and 5 show the effects of spin and speed for the
shot in Diagram 3. Diagram 4 shows what happens if you have less or more draw action than
“typical.” With excellent draw action, the cue ball will draw back more than expected (e.g., see
the blue curve). And with less draw action than “typical” (which will be more common with
beginner and intermediate players), the cue ball will come up short (e.g., see the red curve). With
no draw action (bottom spin) at all at object ball impact (i.e., for a stun shot), the cue ball would
travel straight down the tangent line. If the cue ball loses all draw action and starts to develop roll
on the way to the object ball, the cue ball will follow past the tangent line. The amount of draw
action depends on the cue ball distance to the object ball and the shot speed. The cue ball loses
backspin with distance, especially at lower speeds (e.g., see HSV 3.1). Therefore, to achieve the
same amount of draw for a lower speed shot, you need to strike the cue ball lower than with a
faster speed shot.

                                           excellent draw action
                                           (more than "typical")
                                                         fast
                                                         medium
                                                         slow       good ("typical")
                                                                     draw action
                                                                               fast
                                                                               medium
                                                                               slow
                                       tangent
                                         line
                                              fast
                                              medium
                                                        weak draw action
                                              slow
                                                       (less than "typical")

                                   Diagram 4 Draw action effects

                   HSV 3.1 – Stop shot showing loss of bottom spin over distance
high-speed video

    As shown in Diagram 5, shot speed also affects the shape of the cue ball path. With more
speed, the cue ball travels farther down the tangent line before turning to the final direction. The
diagram shows three different speed shots, all with the same amount of draw action. Note that
for all three shots, the final cue ball paths are all still in the same direction (i.e., the same angle
away from the aiming line), but the higher speed paths are offset farther down the tangent line.
With higher speed, it takes longer for the cue ball to curve to the final direction (e.g., see NV
4.21). To adjust for this in your aim, you can shift your hand along the tangent line (more with
more speed) to get a better prediction of the final cue ball path. The shifting is identical to the
method illustrated in my June ’05 article dealing with speed effects for the 30º rule.

                   NV 4.21 – Delay of draw curve with higher speed
normal video
                                               less speed with
                                              same draw action
                                                         fast      "typical"
                                                         medium      draw
                                                         slow                 fast
                                                                              medium
                                                                              slow

                                            tangent                  fast
                                              line                   medium
                                                                     slow

                                                      more speed with
                                                      same draw action

                                       Diagram 5 Speed effects

    Another thing to notice in Diagram 5 is the differences among the cue tip offsets shown in the
spin/speed boxes for the three shots. The cue ball is assumed to have the same amount of
backspin (as a percentage of the shot speed) for all three shots (see TP A.20 for the technical
details). But since the draw action wears off faster for a slower speed shot, a larger tip offset is
required (i.e., you must hit the cue ball lower) when using less speed.

                    TP A.20 – The effect of spin, speed, and cut angle on draw shots
technical proof

    I hope you are enjoying my series of articles on draw shot physics and aiming. Next month,
we’ll look at some example shots you might come across in game situations where some of this
knowledge can be put to good use.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •      If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access
             them online at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/draw_shot_primer_part_iv_game_examples.pdf
title: Draw Shot Primer - Part IV: game examples
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                                   ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Draw Shot Primer – Part IV: game examples”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., HSV 3.1) help you locate the resources on the
website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view
the resources offline using a CD-ROM. See the website for details.

    This is the fourth article in a series dealing with draw shot principles. In the last three
months, we explored some of the basic physics of draw shots, compared various aiming systems
for predicting the path of the cue ball, and looked in detail into the trisect aiming system. This
month, we’ll look at some real examples where this knowledge can pay off in game situations.

     Diagram 1 illustrates the trisect system that was described in detail in last month’s article.
For a “typical” draw shot, with good action, the angle between the final cue ball direction and the
impact line (2A) is twice the cut angle (A). Remember from previous months that a “typical”
amount of draw is defined as the amount of backspin required to change the cue ball’s direction
by 90° for a half-ball hit. For a draw shot with less action than “typical,” the angle labeled 2A in
Diagram 1 will be larger than 2A; and for a draw shot with lots of action, the angle will be smaller
than 2A. Please refer to last month’s article for all of the details and advice, especially how to use
your hand to help measure the cut angle and visualize the final cue ball direction. Note – if you
want to refer back to any of my past articles, they are available on my website
(billiards.colostate.edu).
                                         cut                   initial
                                        angle                cue ball
                                         "A"                 direction
                                                          (aiming line)

                      object
                       ball
                                                                      tangent
                                                                        line

                          ghost
                           ball

                               cue                                            final
                               ball                                         cue ball
                                                               2A           direction

                                                  A                 line-of-centers
                                                                     (impact line)
                                                                        trisector

                                      Diagram 1 Draw shot trisect system

     When using the trisect system, it is also important to be aware of the effects of shot speed.
The cue ball loses backspin with distance (due to friction between the cue ball and the table’s
cloth), especially at lower speeds (e.g., see HSV 3.1). Therefore, to achieve the same amount of
draw for a lower speed shot, you need to strike the cue ball lower than with a faster speed shot.
Also, shot speed affects the shape of the cue ball path. With more speed, the cue ball travels
farther down the tangent line before turning to the final direction (e.g., see NV 4.21). Again, see
last month’s article for more details.

                   HSV 3.1 – Stop shot showing loss of bottom spin over distance
high-speed video

                   NV 4.21 – Delay of draw curve with higher speed
normal video

    Diagram 2 shows an example where the trisect system can be used to plan a carom draw
shot in a game of 9-ball. Before looking at the shot shown in the diagram, first study the table
layout. The 3-ball is the lowest numbered ball on the table (so it must be hit first), and the 4-ball
and 5-ball are tied up in a cluster up table. What would you do in this situation? There are
several options. You could shoot the 3-ball into top-left corner pocket, but you would likely face
the 4-ball-5-ball cluster on your next shot. You could try to break up the cluster with the cue ball
while pocketing the 3-ball (e.g., by using top and/or right English, with speed, to have the cue ball
travel one or two rails to the cluster), but this might be difficult. And even if you did make contact
with the cluster, you might not leave a good shot on the 4-ball after the break out. A second
option is to play safe by hitting the 3-ball into the 4-ball-5-ball cluster while leaving the cue ball
frozen to (or at least close to) the right side of the 7-ball, blocking a direct path to the new 3-ball
location up table. If executed well, all balls would be free and clear, your opponent would likely
be unable to play a decent shot (or even make contact) with the 3-ball, and you should have a
decent chance to run the table on your next turn. A third option is shown in the diagram. Here, a
draw carom is played off the 3-ball to pocket the 9-ball and win the game. This creative offensive
shot is probably the best option of the three considered, provided you are comfortable with draw
shots and the trisect aiming system. Also, even if you miss the shot, your opponent will still need
to deal with the 4-ball-5-ball cluster.

                                                                                                  A
                                                                                  9

         problem
          cluster                                            7                              A/3
     4                                                           3
         5
                                                            8

                                                                         fast
                                                                         medium
                                                                         slow

                      Diagram 2 Example 9-ball trisect carom draw shot

     To execute the draw carom shot shown in Diagram 2, you need to decide how much to cut
the 3-ball to have the cue ball draw back to pocket the 9-ball. You must ensure that the total
angle between the aiming line and desired cue ball direction (angle “A” in the diagram) is three
times the cut angle (“A/3” in the diagram). It is clear what angle “A” must be in this shot. The
tough part is visualizing one third of this angle to define the aiming line. However, once you think
you have your aiming line figured out, you can use the hand method I presented last month to
check yourself. Then you can make adjustments to your aim if necessary. Also, as mentioned
above, the trisect system applies only for a good draw shot with a “typical” amount of draw action.
If you don’t have a consistent stroke and/or if you don’t have a good feel for the amount of draw,
you might have some difficulty. Also, depending on the exact ball positions and angles on the
shot, you might need to be careful with where the 3-ball is headed. You wouldn’t want to pocket
the 3-ball by accident while missing the 9-ball. If that were to happen, you would be in a difficult
situation facing the 4-ball-5-ball cluster on the next shot, and the cue ball might even be
snookered (blocked) by the 7-ball or 8-ball. As with all shots in all articles in this magazine and in
any books you might read, you should try the shots yourself (on a real life table). But first make
sure you have a good feel for a “typical” amount of draw (see last month’s article for some advice
on how to practice this). Also, if you have trouble visualizing one third of the total angle, use the
hand technique to check yourself (see last month’s article). Don’t feel bad if you have trouble
making the shot because it takes lots of practice to develop a consistent draw stroke and to
visualize the angles.

     Diagram 3 shows another example shot, this time from a game of 8-ball, where knowledge of
the trisect system can help you get out of a bind. You are shooting solids and the 2-ball is tied up
with the 12-ball on the upper cushion. The diagram shows a desirable option, where you pocket
the 5-ball in the bottom left corner pocket while breaking up the cluster with the cue ball. In this
example (unlike with the previous example), you are not free to choose the cut angle. The
required cut angle is shown as “A” in the diagram. The trisect system would predict a final cue
ball path in the direction labeled as “trisect system direction.” Notice angle “2A” from the impact
line to the predicted direction. Last month, I showed an easy way to use your hand to visualize
the cut angle (“A”) and reliably predict the expected cue ball direction. As compared to the
example above (in Diagram 2), it is much easier to apply the hand method here because the
required cut angle is known. Notice that the expected cue ball direction, as predicted by the
trisect system, represents too much draw (i.e., the cue ball will miss the cluster to the right).
Therefore, you need to use a little less than “typical” draw to accomplish the break out.

            tangent line                   trisect system
              direction                        direction

                                       2
                                  12
                                                                                      8
                                                                          fast
                                                                          medium
                                                2A                        slow

                                                                a little less than
                                                                 "trisect" draw

                                                            A

                                   5

                                                   7

              Diagram 3 Example 8-ball “less-than-trisect” draw break-up shot

     Another useful reference direction shown in Diagram 3 is the tangent line. As predicted by
the 90º rule, the cue ball would head straight in the tangent line direction for a stun shot, where
the cue ball has no bottom spin at object ball impact. Because the desired cue ball direction is
closer to the trisect direction than it is to the tangent line, you shouldn’t take too much draw action
off the cue ball. This is the kind of thing that takes practice ... you need to develop a feel for and
control over the amount of draw needed for various paths close to the trisect direction. Ideally,
the cue ball would hit the left side of the 12-ball to leave good position for the 7-ball shot in the
lower side pocket. Diagram 4 shows a possible (and desirable) post-5-ball-shot layout and run-
out plan for winning the game.
                                 12
                                                                                 8

                                             2
                                                                       fast

                                      fast                             medium

                                      medium                           slow
              cue ball
                                      slow
              position
              after the
             5-ball shot
                                        fast
                                        medium
                                        slow

                                                 7

               Diagram 4 Table layout and run-out after 5-ball shot in Diagram 3

    I hope you are enjoying my series of articles on draw shot physics and aiming. I also hope
you see some value in having knowledge and understanding of draw shot physics and the trisect
aiming system. Maybe you will be able to put some of the information to good use in future
games. Next month, I’ll summarize some useful advice on how to improve your draw shot
technique and refer you to some drills that might help you in practice.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access
          them online at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/draw_shot_primer_part_v_how_to_achieve_good_draw_action.pdf
title: Draw Shot Primer Part V How To Achieve Good Draw Action
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                      ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Draw Shot Primer – Part V: How to achieve good draw action”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV 2.2) help you locate the resources on the
website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view
the resources offline using a CD-ROM. See the website for details.

     This is the fifth article in a series dealing with draw shot principles and techniques. In the last
four months, we explored some of the basic physics of draw shots, compared various aiming
systems for predicting the path of the cue ball, looked in detail into the trisect aiming system, and
studied some real examples where all of this knowledge can pay off in game situations.
Unfortunately, if you don’t have a consistent and accurate stroke that enables you to achieve
good draw action, most of this information will be of little use to you. That’s why I decided to
dedicate this month’s article to ideas for how to diagnose problems and make improvements to
your draw stroke technique. This information will be especially useful for beginner and
intermediate players; but even experienced players should periodically spend time diagnosing
and correcting potential deficiencies in their games by revisiting the fundamentals.

    Before I begin, I want to make it clear that any discussion of fundamentals and recommended
practices for good draw technique (or any other pool skill) can be controversial. Even
experienced instructors and authors disagree quite a bit on what are “best practices.” Therefore,
you should take all recommendations in this article with a grain of salt and read some of the
comments from others in the online discussion threads mentioned below. That way you will be
aware of the perspectives of others.

   Below, I’ve done my best to summarize what I and many others think are suggested “best
practices” for a good draw stroke:

    1. Make sure the cue tip is well prepared (shaped and textured) and chalked. A tip of dime
       radius will enable better action than a tip of nickel (or bigger) radius. If the tip surface is
       hardened and doesn’t hold chalk very well, use a roughening or pricking tool to give it
       some texture. When applying chalk, be sure to apply it to the outer portions of the tip that
       make contact with the cue ball.

    2. For more draw action, hit the cue ball farther below center, but not so far as to cause a
       miscue. In my October, 2005 article, I showed that the amount you should hit below
       center for maximum draw is about half the ball radius (i.e., the contact point between the
       cue tip and ball can be half way down from the center of the ball). The red circle on an
       Elephant Practice cue ball (which is used in many of the NV and HSV video clips on my
       website) indicates this limit clearly on the ball. Also, the edge of the colored stripe on a
       striped ball (balls 9-15) happens to be at the half-radius point, so you can use a striped
       ball in practice to help you gage how low you can strike the cue ball. I’ll look at this stuff
       more in a future article when we look at what is called “tips of English.”

    3. For more draw action, hit the cue ball harder (i.e., generate more cue stick speed).

    4. Make sure your aim is true and your stroke is straight. The aim concerns not only the
       aiming line for the cue ball, but also the desired contact point (below center) on the cue
       ball. Especially when using a large cue tip offset to apply significant draw action, contact
       point accuracy is very important to prevent a miscue.
   Other advice:

           a. Concerning items 2 and 3 above, in general, hit the cue ball lower and softer vs.
              higher and harder (especially for short distances to the object ball). When the
              object ball is far away, you have no choice but to hit the cue ball low AND hard
              (to prevent excessive skid and achieve good draw).

           b. Things that help many people achieve 3 and 4 above are:

                      -   Keep your grip relaxed during the entire stroke. If you tense up your
                          hand during the stroke, this will adversely affect your contact point
                          accuracy. This is especially important for power draw shots, where
                          you need significant draw action (e.g., see NV A.10). Players
                          sometimes tend to tense up in the effort to achieve more power, but
                          this can be detrimental to your results. Some people also recommend
                          keeping your wrist relaxed, and even “flicking” it to achieve more
                          power, but this can also lead to inconsistency.

                      -   Follow through more than normal and try to accelerate through the
                          ball. I have bolded “try to,” because theoretically and strictly, it is
                          impossible to actually accelerate through the ball because when the
                          cue stick hits the cue ball it must slow some (i.e., decelerate),
                          regardless of how hard you try to accelerate. However, by maintaining
                          a mental image of trying to accelerate through the ball, it might help
                          you accelerate smoothly and generate more stick speed.

           c.   Practice (with an instructor, friend, and/or video camera watching) to make sure
                you are doing 2, 3, and 4 well. Then practice a lot more.

    In addition to the recommendations above, you should also ensure that your general stroke
fundamentals are solid. Here is an example set of suggested “best practices” you might
consider if you are having trouble with stroke consistency or accuracy:

   1. When in your stance, the cue stick should be set in the desired aiming line direction with
      the cue tip at the desired cue ball contact point (with only a small gap between the cue tip
      and ball). It helps to have a low stance, with your head close to and over the cue stick, to
      visualize your aim. Your forearm should be vertical (hanging straight down) at cue ball
      contact. You should hold the cue stick at the cue ball while making small adjustments
      and verifying both the aiming line and your contact point.

   2. Take several continuous (pause-less) warm-up strokes to ensure that you are relaxed
      and settled and that your aim will remain true during motion. Some people recommend
      getting a feel for the desired stroke speed during the warm-up strokes, but the value of
      this is debatable. Move your eye gaze between the cue ball and the object ball during all
      warm-up strokes to verify the aiming line and cue ball contact point.

   3. Pause (i.e., set again) at the cue ball on your last warm-up stroke and verify the aiming
      line and cue ball contact point. If any adjustments are required, make the changes and
      repeat step 2. At the end of this step, your eyes should be focused on the cue ball
      contact point.

   4. Smoothly and slowly pull back the cue stick, pause at the end of your backstroke, and
      move your eye gaze to the object ball (or more specifically, the ghost-ball target [see NV
      3.1]). A deliberate pause at the end of your backstroke (i.e., before your final forward
      stroke) helps give your eyes time to focus on your target before your final stroke.
      Alternatively, you can shift your eye gaze from the cue ball to the object ball at the end of
      step 3, before the final backstroke. Even if you do this, you should still consider pausing
               at the end of the final backstroke to prevent you from rushing the transition to the forward
               stroke.

     5. With your eye gaze completely focused on the ghost-ball target, smoothly accelerate to
        impact, and follow through, keeping everything still except below your elbow. The
        deliberate pause at the end of your backstroke (see step 4) might help you create a
        smoother transition to your forward stroke. Allison Fisher is an excellent model for this.
        She has a noticeable and consistent pause before her final forward stroke. Concerning
        the importance of follow-through, it has no direct effect on the cue ball, because the tip
        stays in contact with the cue ball only for an instant (e.g., see HSV A.38). However, if
        there is no follow-through, then you are probably somehow constraining your stroke and
        you will probably not achieve good draw action with consistency and accuracy.

     6. Freeze after your stroke, keeping your body, head, and cue stick down well after impact.

     7. If the shot is missed, immediately try to diagnose what went wrong (e.g., check your
        follow-through direction for stroke steer [see NV 2.6] or unintentional elbow drop, check
        your grip pressure to make sure you didn’t tense up, decide if squirt or throw was not
        adequately accounted for if English was used, etc.).

     A detailed acronym one can use to summarize this list is SWPPPGAFFD (pronounced
"swap-gaffed"): set, warm-up, pause, pull-back, pause, gaze, accelerate, follow-through,
freeze, diagnose. I know this acronym is a bit ridiculous in length, especially if you hope to
remember what all of the letters mean; so if you want something simpler, use SPFF (set, pause,
finish, freeze), which is taught by many BCA-certified instructors. This acronym is a lot snappier
and easier to remember.

     Some of the “best practices” and recommendations above are illustrated and demonstrated in
NV 2.2, 2.5, 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3; but I have to admit, when I shot those videos several years ago, I
was not a great model for solid fundamentals. Believe me, I have received numerous e-mails
over the years from people pointing out some of the technique flaws apparent in some of my
online clips. If I ever find some spare time (yeah ... right!), I hope to re-shoot and improve some
of the clips to set a better example. I now try to live by all of the “best practices” presented
above. My game certainly improved when I started doing so. An experience that helped me
become more aware of the importance of some of the fundamentals was a visit to Cue Tech in
Dallas. Randy Goettlicher (the “godfather” of SPFF) was gracious enough to invite me to sit in
(and participate in) one of his Pool School courses last summer so I could experience his
teaching approach. I was very impressed with his operation and I learned at lot from the
instructors there (Randy, Leslie Rogers, Carl Oswald, and others), and I made some good friends
along the way. Thanks again, Randy!
                      NV 2.2 – Close-up of the grip during a good stroke
                      NV 2.5 – A good stroke
                      NV 2.6 – Steering follow-through
                      NV 3.1 – Practicing contact point and ghost ball visualization
normal video          NV 3.2 – Using the cue stick to help visualize the impact and aiming lines
                      NV 3.3 – Addressing the ball and taking your stance
                      NV A.10 – Power draw for run-out position

                      HSV A.38 – Draw shot with large offset, light grip, good follow-through, fast
high-speed video      speed, and about 7 feet of draw

     Some of the controversial questions that often come up concerning stroke fundamentals are:

               •   Should you have a deliberate pause at the end of your final backstroke?
          •   Should you not drop your elbow before and/or after cue ball contact?

          •   Is a closed bridge better than an open bridge for draw shots?

          •   Should your dominant eye be directly above the cue stick?

If you are curious to read different opinions on these matters, check out the links under “stroke,”
“bridge,” and “aiming” in the “Online Discussion Thread Summary” section of my website. There,
you can find over 400 postings dealing with elbow drop and SPFF alone! Maybe you’ll even want
to add your own two-cents worth to the discussion. But don’t say I didn’t warn you ... sometimes
the discussion and debate can get quite heated.

     An important reminder concerning any “best practices” or recommendations is: In the end,
you need to be comfortable and use whatever works best for you as an individual. This is where
practice drills and time with an experienced instructor can pay off. With disciplined practice and
quality feedback, you can identify and eliminate potential flaws in your fundaments and take
corrective action. Change can often be uncomfortable at first, but try to keep your mind open to
tweaking your technique, especially if changes are recommended by an experienced instructor.
But in the end, if doing something “not recommended” helps you be more consistent and
accurate, then that’s what you should do. Always remember, the only things that really matter for
a good draw shot are the cue tip contact point on the cue ball and the cue stick speed at impact.
The farther below center you contact the ball (without miscue), and the faster the cue stick speed
at impact, the more draw you will get on the cue ball.

     So, if you have solid fundamentals and follow recommended “best practices,” and you are still
unhappy with the consistency, accuracy, and/or power of your draw stroke, how do you get
better? Drum roll, please ... the answer is ... Practice, Practice, Practice (no big surprise here).
The most efficient way to practice almost any technique is to use well-designed drills. In the
“Student and Instructor Resources” section of my website, I have a link to some excellent drills
Bob Jewett has available online. He uses the phrase “Progressive Practice” to describe the drills.
Bob first wrote about them in his December, 1992 BD article. (FYI, I have a link to Bob’s articles
at the bottom of the “Instructional Articles” section of my website, where you can also find all of
my past articles). As with all well designed drills, the Progressive Practice drills start simple to
build confidence with successful and comfortable execution. Then, by design, the drills
automatically adjust the difficulty level to match your current level of ability. The drills therefore
provide an easy way to measure your level of ability. Also, the challenge the drills present can be
fun. In next month’s article, I will present another example drill you can use to diagnose potential
flaws in your draw stroke and measure your progress as you improve with practice.

    I hope you are enjoying my series of articles on draw shot physics, aiming, and technique. I
hope you have been able to put some of the information to good use in your game. After looking
at a recommended practice drill next month, I’ll conclude the series by looking at “tips of English”
and how it is used (and sometimes misused) to describe various amounts of draw.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access
          them online at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/draw_shot_primer_part_vi_draw_shot_practice_drill.pdf
title: Draw Shot Primer - Part VI: Draw Shot Practice Drill
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                      ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Draw Shot Primer – Part VI: Draw Shot Practice Drill”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV 2.2) help you locate the resources on the
website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view
the resources offline using a CD-ROM. See the website for details.

     This is the sixth article in a series dealing with draw shot principles and techniques. In the
last five months, we explored some of the basic physics of draw shots, compared various aiming
systems for predicting the path of the cue ball, looked in detail into the trisect aiming system,
studied some real examples where all of this knowledge can pay off in game situations, and
summarized some recommended “best practices” for good draw technique. In this article, we will
look at a practice drill that might help you further develop and improve your draw shot technique.

     Diagram 1 shows a drill you might find useful ... I call it “Dr. Dave’s Draw Drill.” The object
ball (OB) is located in the center of the table and the cue ball (CB) is located half way between
the OB and the lower left corner pocket. The goal is to pocket the OB in the upper right corner
pocket, while controlling the amount of draw on the CB. For the drill, you try each of the five
shots shown, five times each. With the STOP shots (slow and fast), the desired target location
for the CB is position A. The targets for the other shots are positions B for the SHORT draw, C
for the MEDIUM draw, and D (the corner pocket) for the LONG draw. Before beginning the drill,
make sure your cue tip is well shaped (nickel or dime radius) and textured (so it will hold chalk),
and make sure you chalk before each shot. For all shots, you should try for a centerline hit on the
CB (i.e., hit the CB on the vertical axis). For each shot, you (and/or a helper) will need to keep
track of where the OB and CB go and observe any unintentional English on the CB. An Aramith
red dot CB (like the pros use on TV) or any ball with markings is recommended to help you
visualize any CB sidespin after OB impact.

    You can use a tape measure to lay out the shot. Lay it diagonally across the table between
the far corner pockets. Mark the OB location (the middle point on the table) and the CB location
with two white, self-adhesive, hole-reinforcement labels (i.e., the little white “donuts” available at
any office or school supply store) so you can easily and repeatedly re-spot the CB and OB. Once
the donuts are placed carefully, it is a good idea to tap the balls in place by striking down with a
spare ball to make small indentations in the cloth. This will help ensure that the CB and OB are
placed in exactly the same spots for each attempt.

    As a side note, the same drill could also be used for follow shots, where the desired CB
target locations would be at mirror image positions on the other side of the table (along the same
diagonal).
                 MEDIUM draw                  SHORT draw
                            fast                      fast

                            medium                    medium

                            slow                      slow

                                                  A

           LONG draw                     B
                   fast
                   medium          C                                   STOP shot
                   slow
                                                                    fast              fast
                                                                    medium            medium
          D                                                         slow              slow

                                                                slow               fast

                                       Diagram 1 Dr. Dave’s draw drill

    Table 1 shows some example data for the drill. Diagram 1 and a blank copy of Table 1 are
available in the “Instructor and Student Resources” section of my website if you want to print
copies for your own use over time. Table 2 summarizes what all of the letters mean. For each
attempt of each shot, you record whether or not the OB is pocketed, where the CB ends up
relative to the target, and whether or not the CB had any observable English. An attempt gets a
score of 1 if the OB is pocketed and if the CB ends up within the specified distance of the desired
target; otherwise, the score is 0 for the attempt. The five attempt scores are added across the
row for each type of shot and tabulated down the final column for a total score for the drill.

   Here are some examples of how to interpret the data in Table 1 based on the information in
Table 2:
    •   In the fourth attempt of the slow STOP shot, the OB missed the pocket the right (R), the
        CB (Y) was within 1-2 inches of the desired target (position “A”), and left English was
        observed on the CB. Because the OB was not pocketed, the score is 0 for that attempt.
    •   In the fourth attempt of the fast STOP shot, the OB was pocketed and no English was
        observed on the CB (C), but the CB ended up past the target (G = long), so the score is
        0.
    •   In the second attempt of the SHORT draw shot, the OB was pocketed and no English
        was observed on the CB (C), but the CB ended up long (G) and left (L) of the desired
        target (i.e., it was farther than 2-4 inches away from position B).
    •   In the fifth attempt of the LONG draw shot, the OB was pocketed and the CB was on
        target (i.e., it ended up in the pocket at position “D”), so the attempt gets a score of 1
        even though left English was observed on the CB.

Any miscues, as with the fourth attempt of the LONG draw shot, receive a score of 0. Miscues
can result from hitting the CB too low and/or having a poorly shaped, textured, or chalked tip. If
you have trouble visualizing the post-impact spin on the CB (e.g., because no or very little English
was applied), just mark the attempt as “C” (no English). Not surprisingly, the sub total score for
the slow STOP shot (4) is the highest of the five shot types. The total score for all five attempts of
all five shots is 13 out of a possible 25. If you prefer a 100-scale score, multiply the total by 4
(e.g., 13 out of 25 is equivalent to 52 out of 100).
                           Table 1 Dr. Dave’s Draw Drill example results

                                                  attempt                                score
   shot         result
                                 1            2      3             4           5        subtotal
                  OB             P          P         P            R           P
  slow             CB            Y          Y         Y            Y           Y
                                                                                             4
  STOP           English         C          C         C            L           C
                 score           1          1         1            0           1
                  OB             P          P         L            P           P
   fast            CB            Y          Y        S, R          G           Y
                                                                                             3
  STOP           English         C          C         L            C           L
                 score           1          1         0            0           1
                  OB             P          P         P            P           P
SHORT              CB            S         G, L       Y            Y           Y
                                                                                             3
 draw            English         R          C         L            C           C
                 score           0          0         1            1           1
                  OB             P          R         P            P           L
MEDIUM             CB           S, L        Y         Y            Y           G
                                                                                             2
 draw            English         C          R         C            L           L
                 score           0          0         1            1           0
                  OB             P          L         R                        P
 LONG              CB           S, L        R         L        miscue          Y
                                                                                             1
 draw            English         C          L         R                        L
                 score           0          0         0            0           1

                                                                             total:         13

                                     Table 2 Legend for Table 1

OB result                                          English
P: pocketed the ball                               C: center-line hit on the vertical axis of the CB
L: missed the pocket left                             (i.e., no English)
R: missed the pocket right                         L: left English
                                                   R: right English
CB result
Y: within desired distance from target             score
S: short of target    G: long (past target)        1: OB pocketed (P) and CB on target (Y)
L: left of target  R: right of target              0: OB not pocketed (L or R) or CB off target

                                      CB target definitions
STOP shot: within 1-2 inches of position A       MEDIUM draw: within 3-5 inches of position C
SHORT draw: within 2-4 inches of position B      LONG draw: in the pocket (position D)

     The LONG draw shot can be quite a challenge, even for top players. If you can score a 5 in
this category consistently, you probably don’t need Dr. Dave’s drill. The LONG draw shot first
requires that enough draw action be applied to the CB (i.e., the CB must be hit low enough with
enough speed) to achieve the target distance. Also, the CB must be struck close to its vertical
axis; otherwise, squirt and throw effects will come into play. Finally, your aiming line must be true
(i.e., the CB must hit the OB squarely). To accomplish all of this consistently, you must have an
excellent stroke.

     The drill can be useful for many purposes. First of all, it provides practice for various stop
and draw shots, helping you develop a feel for the required amount of speed and cue tip offset
(i.e., the amount you hit the CB off center) for different shots. Secondly, you can use the drill
score to monitor your progress over time, from week to week or month to month by keeping track
of your scores (and even plotting them on a graph if you are an analytical kind of person). The
score can also be used as a challenge to you and your friends to see who can score the highest.
Thirdly, the drill might help you develop a better understanding of the effects of and relationships
between shot speed, squirt and throw. If you are not familiar with these terms, you might want to
refer to a good book (I recommend “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards,” although, this
is a biased and impartial recommendation) and/or view some of the resources on my website
(e.g., video demos, online threaded discussion topics, glossary, etc.). Finally, concerning
purposes for the drill, if any trends are evident in your tabulated data, you might be able to identify
possible flaws in your fundamentals. For example:
    •   If the OB misses the pocket consistently to one side, you might have a problem with
        aiming, cue tip alignment, or your stroke (e.g., steering follow-through).
    •   If the OB misses the pocket consistently to one side only at higher speeds, you might be
        tensing up your grip or rushing the transition between your final back swing and forward
        swing with higher speed shots.
    •   If the CB is consistently short of the target, you are obviously not getting enough draw
        action, and you need to contact the CB lower and/or increase your stick speed.
    •   If the CB target proximity or English results seem kind of random, you obviously have a
        problem with consistency. If this is the case, you probably need to strengthen your
        fundamentals and/or just practice more.

Hopefully, the challenge of the drill will help you get excited about practicing more. Obviously, it
might be helpful to have an experienced and qualified instructor work with you to help diagnose
potential problems and work on possible fixes, depending on what your results show.

    Other observations that can be made from the sample data in Table 1 include:
    •   The CB had left (L) English more often than right (R). Obviously, this indicates the CB
        was being hit left of the vertical centerline. This could indicate an alignment or stroke
        flaw.
    •   Notice that with the fourth attempt of the slow STOP shot, the OB missed right and left
        English was observed on the CB. The explanation for this is that there is more swerve
        (English curve) and throw (spin-induced) at low speed. Both effects would tend to deflect
        the OB to the right.
    •   For the higher speed shots, the OB error direction (e.g., left) seems to be in the same
        direction as the CB English (e.g., left). An obvious explanation for this is that squirt (CB
        deflection) is a dominant factor at higher speed (i.e. more significant than swerve and
        throw effects).

If any data were inconsistent with the conclusions in the 2nd and 3rd bullets above (e.g., if the OB
missed left of the pocket with left English on the CB at slow speed, or if the OB misses left of the
pocket with right English on the CB at higher speeds), this would indicate serious flaws with
alignment, aiming, and/or stroke fundamentals. If you see such trends, you might want to seek
out a qualified and experienced instructor for help.

   CB English and the proximity to the CB target can be better indicators of potential flaws than
whether or not you pocket the OB. The OB can be pocketed even with a far-from-perfect hit on
the CB if aiming errors and English effects (squirt, swerve, and/or throw) tend to cancel for a shot.
Also, the OB can “cheat the pocket” (i.e., be off center a little) and still go in. Therefore, the CB
target and English indicators are useful, whether or not the OB is pocketed. You might have a
consistently straight stroke, but if you unintentionally and consistently hit the CB off center or off
the aiming line, you won’t generally have good results. If you see any trends with the CB target
and English data, you might want to adjust your head alignment to better visualize the aiming line
and intended cue-tip-CB contact point.

     It is important to note that you will get the maximum benefit from this or any other drill only if
you have solid fundamentals (stance, grip, bridge, and stroke). Please refer to last month’s
article if you want some recommendations and advice on how to improve your stroke
fundamentals. Some of the basics are described and demonstrated in NV 2.2, 2.5, 2.6, and 3.3.
                      NV 2.2 – Close-up of the grip during a good stroke
                      NV 2.5 – A good stroke
normal video
                      NV 2.6 – Steering follow-through
                      NV 3.3 – Addressing the ball and taking your stance

     If you are interested in additional drills to help you practice and improve your draw technique,
more can be found in the “Student and Instructor Resources” section of my website, where I have
a link to some excellent drills Bob Jewett has available online.

      I hope you are enjoying my series of articles on draw shot physics, aiming, and technique. I
hope you have been able to put some of the information to good use in your game. Next month,
I’ll conclude the series by looking at “tips of English” and how it is used (and sometimes misused)
to describe various amounts of draw.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access
               them online at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/draw_shot_primer_part_vii_tips_of_english.pdf
title: Draw Shot Primer - Part VII: Tips of English
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                                       ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Draw Shot Primer – Part VII: Tips of English”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV 2.1) help you locate the resources on the
website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view
the resources offline using a CD-ROM. See the website for details.

    This is the seventh and final article in a series dealing with draw shot principles and
techniques. In previous months, we explored some of the basic physics of draw shots, compared
various aiming systems for predicting the path of the cue ball, looked in detail into the trisect
aiming system, studied some real examples where all of this knowledge can pay off in game
situations, summarized some recommended “best practices” for good draw technique, and looked
at a practice drill that might help you improve. In this final article, we’ll look at “tips” of English ...
how it is defined, how it varies with tip size and tip shape, and how you can visualize it at the
table.

     Before beginning, I want to summarize some conclusions from an excellent article by George
Onoda concerning draw shots in the August ’91 issue of Billiard Digest. (FYI, this and other past
instructional articles by various authors can be viewed online via the links at the bottom of the
“Instructional Articles” section of my website). In the article, Dr. Onoda described the following
suggestions concerning draw shots:
    1. For maximum draw, without too much risk of a miscue, the cue ball should be struck half
       way between its center and its edge.
    2. The width of a striped ball (balls 9 through 15) happens to be half of the ball’s diameter,
       so it can be used to practice the maximum recommended tip offset suggested in item 1.
    3. Draw shot miscues are often caused by hitting the table before the cue ball.

     Before continuing, let’s look at the terminology shown in Diagram 1. Cue tip offset is defined
as the distance between the line of action of the cue stick (through the contact point of the ball)
and the center of the cue ball. The larger the offset, the more spin gets applied to the cue ball.
Coriolis, in 1835, proved that the optimal offset for maximum English is half of the ball’s radius
(see my October ’05 article for more information). This is also the limit usually suggested for
safely avoiding miscues (see NV 2.1). A pool ball’s diameter (D) is 2 1/4” and its radius (R) is 1
1/8” (R = D/2); therefore, the maximum recommended cue tip offset is 9/16” (R/2 or 0.5R). Notice
in the diagram how the contact point and cue tip offset are affected by cue stick elevation (the
angle of the cue stick above horizontal). It is important to measure the offset from the line of
action of the cue stick to the center of the ball, regardless of the amount of elevation. The cue is
always elevated some due to required clearance over the rails (see TP A.3). As we will see
below, tip size and curvature (tip radius) also affect how much offset can be achieved. Tip sizes
are generally in the 11 to 14 mm range, with 12 to 13 mm being the most common. Tip radius is
generally recommended to be between the curvature of a nickel and a dime. A fatter and flatter
tip will result in less table clearance (the distance between the bottom edge of the tip and the
cloth surface, at impact with the cue ball), especially for larger tip offsets. One advantage of a
flatter tip is that it can help improve the consistency of center-ball hits. All of the terms used
above are illustrated clearly in Diagram 1.
                                         contact point
                                                                     ball radius
                           tip size

                   cue stick elevation                                   cue tip offset

                                       tip radius         table clearance

                        Diagram 1 Cue tip offset parameters and variables

                  NV 2.1 – Miscue due to off-center hit with no chalk
normal video

                  TP A.3 – Minimum cue stick elevation required for a head-spot-to-foot-spot
technical proof       center-ball-hit shot

     Diagram 2 shows two aiming aids that can be used to help you learn how to judge the
maximum safe tip offset for applying maximum English. The first is the Elephant Practice cue ball
that has a red circle with a radius of exactly 9/16” (R/2), clearly showing the offset limit. The
Elephant Practice ball also has a thin black stripe that can be used to help visualize aim (see NV
3.1) and the amount of spin on the ball (e.g., see HSV 4.1). Super-slow motion clips HSV A.16
and A.38 show good examples of the Elephant Practice ball being struck at near the red circle
(R/2) limit to achieve maximum English. (Note - an Aramith red-spotted ball, like the pros use on
TV, is better for spin visualization in most situations because it is not orientation-dependent like
the Elephant Practice ball. If the Elephant ball stripe happens to be lined up with the spin
direction, you can’t see the spin at all.) The second aid in Diagram 2 (per suggestion 2 above) is
a standard striped ball. The edge of the colored stripe happens to be at the half-radius (0.5R)
point. This might not be the case with the balls you are using, so be sure to first measure the
stripe with a ruler or caliper to verify that the width is 1 1/8” (R) before using one for practice.
Also, be sure to clean the chalk marks off before using the ball in normal play because spin-
induced and cut-induced throw can be increased significantly if the cue ball happens to hit the
marked striped ball on a chalk smudge. I’ll look at these and other throw principles and effects in
detail in my next series of articles.

                                                  Elephant             striped ball
                                                 Practice Ball       (some brands)
                       maximum
                     recommended
                         offset
                                             R

                                      0.5R
                                                                 R          9

                                 R = 1/2 (2 1/4") = 1 1/8"       0.5R = 9/16"

                              Diagram 2 Maximum offset aiming aids
                   NV 3.1 – Practicing contact point and ghost ball visualization
normal video

                   HSV 4.1 – Draw shot
                   HSV A.16 – Side-English cue-tip reaction for a very large offset, very fast speed,
                        non-miscue shot
high-speed video
                   HSV A.38 – Draw shot with large offset, light grip, good follow-through, fast
                        speed, and about 7 feet of draw

     For suggestion 3 above, Dr. Onoda suggested the following possible approaches to help
prevent miscues with large-offset draw shots: elevate the cue, use a smaller tip, and/or develop a
more accurate stroke. Elevating the cue is not always a good approach because the stance,
bridge and stroke might not be as comfortable, aiming might be more difficult to visualize, follow-
through might be limited, and any sideways error in your tip position will result in more cue ball
swerve and less accuracy (especially for longer shots). A more accurate stroke is a desirable
goal for everybody for all shots (see my May ’06 article for some useful advice), and the reason
why it is even more important for draw shots is there isn’t much clearance between the tip and
table for large offset shots. TP A.22 analyzes the effects of cue stick elevation, tip curvature, and
tip size on tip offset and table clearance. The most obvious result is that using a smaller and
rounder tip allows one to achieve larger offsets while maintaining ample table clearance. It turns
out that for a thin tip (e.g., 11 mm) with dime radius, the maximum possible cue tip offset with an
average cue stick elevation is about 0.66R, which is much larger than the maximum
recommended value (0.5R), so additional cue stick elevation is not necessary. For a fat tip (e.g.,
14 mm) with nickel radius, the maximum possible offset is only about 0.59, and at the maximum
recommended offset (0.5R), the table clearance is only 0.15 inches (not much room for error).
This is much smaller than the table clearance (0.24 inches) for a thin, dime-shaped tip.

     Now, as for whether Onoda’s suggestion 3 above is correct or not is another matter. Hitting
the table first is actually not the most common cause for miscues with draw shots. A more likely
cause (based on the numbers in the previous paragraph) is hitting the cue ball too low (e.g., with
an offset greater than 0.5R). This would be especially true if the cue tip were not well shaped and
chalked (in which case miscues would occur with even smaller offsets). I want to thank Bob
Jewett and “Jal” (a user on the BD CCB online forum) for helping reassure me that miscues
usually occur with the tip well above the table surface. HSV A.1 shows two interesting shot
examples related to draw miscues. The second shot in the clip is obviously a miscue; but in the
first shot, the cue tip seems to hit the ball and table at very close to the same time. An illegal
jump (“scoop”) shot is the result, but it would be a stretch to call the shot a “miscue.”

                   HSV A.1 – Illegal jump shots - scooping under the cue ball (close-up)
high-speed video

                   TP A.22 – "Tips" of English
technical proof

    Some people claim they can achieve more backspin by elevating the cue stick. This might be
true for some people, but the reasons might be debatable. As shown in TP A.22, elevation does
allow larger tip offsets without risking hitting the table first, especially for a larger tip with a larger
radius of curvature. However, as I point out above, extra elevation is not required to achieve
maximum recommended offsets, even for fatter and less round tips. Also, the cue ball will lose
some of its spin due to friction between the ball and the cloth as it is driven into the table. And as
pointed out above, there are other negative consequences associated with cue stick elevation
(e.g., swerve for slightly off center hits).
     Diagram 3 shows how “tips of English” is defined. This phrase is often used by pool
instructors and players to describe how much English should be applied. With “one tip” of
English, the cue stick is lowered one tip thickness (“t” in the diagram) below a center-ball hit. For
“one and a half tips” of English, the tip is one and a half thicknesses lower than it would be for a
center-ball hit. The obvious advantage to this method is that it is very easy to visualize and
explain. The obvious problem is that the amount of tip offset will depend on the size and
curvature of the tip. TP A.22 reports offsets and table clearances for different tip geometries and
for various “tips of English” values. As shown in Diagram 4, for a given number of “tips of
English” (e.g., 1.5), a fat, round tip will result in a larger tip offset than a thin, flatter tip.

          front
       (shooter's)                                             side view
          view

          0               t
         1                t
        1.5
                         0.5t

                                 0 "tips" of English
                                                            1 "tip" of English      1.5 "tips" of English
                                  (center-ball hit)

                                    Diagram 3 “Tips” of English

                                             difference
                                            in tip offset

                         1.5 "tips" of English              1.5 "tips" of English
                          with a thin, flat tip             with a fat, round tip

                              Diagram 4 Thin, flat tip vs. fat, round tip

    For the reasons mentioned above, I prefer using percentages or fractions of the maximum
offset instead of “tips of English.” With practice, a player will know how far down they can strike
the cue ball to avoid a miscue (which should be close to an offset of 0.5R). Knowing the lowest
possible position, it is relatively easy to explain and visualize 1/2 (50%) or 1/4 (25%) of that offset.
1/2 or 50% of the maximum is the same regardless of the size or shape of the tip. TP A.22
compares percentage values to “tips of English” values, and the discrepancy can be surprising.
For example, for “1.5 tips of English,” the tip offset percentage for a thin tip with nickel radius is
about 84% of maximum, as compared to 112% (where a miscue would likely occur) for a fat tip
with dime radius. That’s quite a big difference. Strictly speaking, to accurately measure fractions
or percentages of English, focus should be on the contact point on the cue ball, and not the
center of the cue stick. The reason for this is that the contact point is farther from the center for
larger offsets (as can be seen in Diagram 3). However, this is a bit too detailed for most people
and it can be difficult to visualize, so I don’t want to make a big deal about it. However, using
fractions or percentages of maximum offset (whether applied to the height of the cue stick center
or the contact point) is still a more consistent and accurate approach than using “tips of English.”

    I hope you have enjoyed my series of articles on draw shot physics, aiming, and technique. I
also hope you have been able to put some of the information to good use in your game. I’ll see
you next month with a new series of articles dealing with various throw principles and effects.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access
          them online at billiards.colostate.edu.
      •   If you are unfamiliar with any terms used in this or other articles, please refer to the online
          glossary and/or discussion threads available in the “Instructor and Student Resources”
          section of my website.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/dynamics_in_carom_three_cushion.pdf
title: Dynamics In Carom Three Cushion
topics: collisions_and_impacts
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
[NO_EXTRACTED_TEXT]
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/effects_of_material_properties_of_cue_on_ball_trajectory_in_billiards.pdf
title: JSME-TJ
topics: collisions_and_impacts, robotics_and_computation
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
Journal of Solid Mechanics                                                                                                       Vol. 3, No. 7, 2009

and Materials
Engineering

                                                     Effects of Material Properties of Cue on
                                                           Ball Trajectory in Billiards＊
                                                                Shinsuke SHIMAMURA**, Kazuhiro SUGA***,
                                                                Yoshitaka EZAWA**** and Shigeru AOKI*****
                                                      ** Graduate School of Engineering, Intelligent Material and Mechatronics Systems,
                                                                Toyo University, 2100 Kujirai, Kawagoe, Saitama 350-8585, Japan
                                               *** Department of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of Science and Technology, Tokyo University of
                                                                    Science, 2641 Yamazaki, Noda, Chiba, 278-8510, Japan
                                                          **** Department of Computational Science and Engineering, Toyo University,
                                                                       2100 Kujirai, Kawagoe, Saitama 350-8585, Japan
                                                                                E-mail: ezawa@toyonet.toyo.ac.jp
                                                         ***** Department of Computational Science and Engineering, Toyo University,
                                                                       2100 Kujirai, Kawagoe, Saitama 350-8585, Japan

                                                 Abstract
                                                 The numerical evaluation of impact characteristics of a cue in billiards is performed
                                                 for the case where the ball trajectory is deviated from the hitting direction and
                                                 curved by hitting a ball on its upper left or right part with an inclined cue. The
                                                 effective numerical method developed in the previous papers, in which a cue and a
                                                 ball are assumed to be isotropically elastic and rigid, respectively, is extended for
                                                 this case. The extended method is verified with an experiment using a high speed
                                                 camera. The result obtained with the extended method shows that the radius of
                                                 curvature of the ball trajectory is large for the impact on its almost exactly left part
                                                 with a slightly inclined cue, and this result agrees with an empirical one. It is found
                                                 from a numerical simulation that if the Young’s modulus or mass density of a shaft
                                                 of a cue is large, the ball trajectory immediately after the impact is deviated largely
                                                 and then is curved with a large radius of curvature. Because the extended method
                                                 can evaluate quantitatively this kind of effects of material properties, it is useful for
                                                 a design of a cue.

                                                 Key words: Impact, Cue, Billiards, Curved Ball Trajectory, Efficient Numerical
                                                            Method, Simulation

                                             1. Introduction

                                                   Billiards is one of the most popular games in the world, but little research has been
                                             done on the design of a cue, which consists of a leather tap, a plastic ferrule and a wooden
                                             shaft. Although it is important how to make a cue easier to use or how to fit a cue to the
                                             player’s skill, it has been relied on the trial and error method, and a lot of time and cost has
*Received 13 May, 2009 (No. T2-08-0501)
Japanese Original : Trans. Jpn. Soc. Mech.   been needed. In order to make a reasonable design for a cue, it is desired to develop an
  Eng., Vol. 74, No. 748, C (2008),
  pp.2870-2877 (Received 2 June, 2008)       effective numerical method and to investigate the effects of material properties of a cue on
[DOI: 10.1299/jmmp.3.978]

                                                                                                                                               978
Journal of Solid Mechanics                                                                                                  Vol. 3, No. 7, 2009
and Materials Engineering

                         ball motions.
                               In the previous papers (1),(2), we developed an effective numerical method by
                         combining the finite different and the finite element methods to analyze the behaviors of
                         impact between a cue and a ball in the basic follow or draw shot, where the ball is hit on its
                         upper or lower central part in the horizontal or an inclined direction, respectively. Not only
                         the follow and the draw shots but also various ball hitting techniques are required
                         depending on an aspect of a game. In the recent paper (3), we extended the numerical
                         method further to treat the spinning case, where the ball is hit on the left or right part in the
                         horizontal direction.
                               In this paper, the numerical method is extended for the case where the ball is hit on its
                         upper left or right part in an inclined direction to give it a curved trajectory. After the
                         extended method is verified using a high speed camera, a numerical simulation is performed
                         to investigate the effects of stiffness and density of a shaft on the ball motions. The rotation
                         around the vertical axis is referred to as ‘spin’, and the rotation around the horizontal axis is
                         referred to as ‘roll’, in this paper.

                         2. Outline of Numerical Method

                               We consider the case where a ball is
                                                                         x’
                         hit on its upper left part with velocity v in
                                                                                             f (t )
                         an inclined direction φ as shown in Fig.1.                                                             ϕ
                                                                                                              α (t )
                         We adopt a fixed rectangular coordinate
                         O-x,y,z, where the y axis is taken in the
                                                                                                           β (t )
                         vertical direction and the z axis is taken      z’                                                             x
                         perpendicular to the cue. The impact force
                                                                                                                                     z
                         is assumed to be a concentrated point                                        y’                                      y
                         force. At first, the impact force is assumed         Fig.1    Ball hit on its upper left part in
                         to be prescribed. The cue is assumed to be           inclined direction
                         isotropically elastic and is analyzed with
                         the finite element method, while the ball
                                                                                                             trajectory
                         and table are assumed to be rigid and the                 x                                                    ・
                         ball is analyzed with the finite difference                                                                    ρ
                                                                                                                       γ (t )
                                                                                                               ・
                         method as in the previous papers (1)-(3).                                             s
                         Then, by coupling the velocities at the                             δ (t )                                 ・
                         impact point, the impact force is modified                                                                 b
                         using the downhill simplex method (4).
                                                                                z′
                                                                                                             y′

                         3. Finite Difference Analysis of Ball                 z         y
                         3.1 Equations of Motion
                                                                              Fig. 2    Schematic view of ball trajectory
                               We adopt not only the fixed
                         rectangular coordinate O-x,y,z, but also

                                                                                                                                            979
Journal of Solid Mechanics                                                                                 Vol. 3, No. 7, 2009
and Materials Engineering

                         the moving rectangular coordinate O′ − x′, y ′, z ′ which is obtained by translating the O-x,y,z
                         to the centre of a moving ball, as shown in Fig.1. Let b(t) =(bx(t), by(t), bz(t)) denote the
                         displacement of the ball centre, θ(t) =(θx(t), θy(t) , θz(t)) the rotational angle of a ball, f(t)
                         =(fx(t), fy(t), fz(t)) the impact force and Fr=(Frx(t), 0, Frz(t)) the frictional force. The
                         equations of motion are given with Eqs (1)-(6).
                         For translation:

                               M bx = f x ( t ) − Frx ( t )          (1)

                               M by = 0                              (2)

                               M bz = f z ( t ) − F rz ( t )         (3)

                         For rotation:

                               2
                                 MR 2θx = − f y (t ) R cos α (t ) sin β (t ) − f z (t ) R sin α (t )
                               5                                                                                   （4）
                               + M r sin γ (t ) − Frz (t ) R

                               2
                                 M R 2θy = f x ( t ) R cos α ( t ) sin β ( t )
                               5                                                                                   （5）
                               + f z ( t ) R cos α ( t ) cos β ( t ) − M s

                               2
                                 MR 2θz = f x ( t ) R sin α (t )＋ Frx (t ) R
                               5                                                                                   （6）
                               − f y (t ) R cos α (t ) cos β (t ) − M r cos γ ( t )

                         where M and R are the mass and radius of ball, Mr and Ms are the frictional moments for
                         rolling and spinning, α(t) andβ(t) are the angles representing the impact point as shown in
                         Fig.1, and (･) represents the time derivative.
                                                               ．
                                The velocity of ball centre, b，is expressed as the sum of the velocity due to slip
                                                      ．
                         between a ball and a table, s , and the velocity due to rolling, ρ , as shown in Fig.2, i.e.,

                                   bx = s x + R θz                   （7）

                                   by = 0                             （8）

                                    bz = s z − R θx                 （9）
                                                                 ．
                         Theδ(t) and γ(t) are the angles between s and x′ axis, and between ρ and x′ axis,
                         respectively, i.e.
                                     ρ cos γ ( t ) = R θz           （10）

                                     ρ sin γ ( t ) = R θx           （11）

                                     s cos δ ( t ) = s x            （12）

                                     s sin δ ( t ) = − s z           （13）

                                                                                                                         980
Journal of Solid Mechanics                                                                                             Vol. 3, No. 7, 2009
and Materials Engineering
                                                                  ．
                         where   ρ = ｜ ρ ｜ and s =| s |.

                              The Frx(t) and Frz(t)) for s ≠ 0 are represented as

                                     Frx = µ ( Mg + f y ( t )) cos δ (t )             （14）

                                     Frz = µ ( Mg + f y (t )) sin δ (t )              （15）

                         where μ is the coefficient of friction and g is the gravitational acceleration.

                         3.2 Angles Representing Impact Point
                              The x′, y ′ and z ′ coordinates of the impact point are expressed in the terms of α(t)
                         andβ(t) as follows.

                              x′(t ) = − R cosα (t ) cos β (t )                                           （16）

                               y′(t ) = − R sin α (t )                                                    （17）

                               z′(t ) = R cos α (t ) sin β (t )                                           （18）

                         Differentiation with t leads to

                               x ′ = R sin α (t ) cos β (t )α + R cos α (t ) sin β (t ) β              （19）

                               y ′ = − R cos α (t )α                                                    （20）

                               z′ = − R sin α (t ) sin β (t )α + R cos α (t ) cos β (t ) β            （21）

                         On the other hand, the x′ , y ′ and z′ are expressed in terms of θx , θy and θz as
                               x ′ = R cos α (t ) sin β (t )θy + R sin α (t )θz                       （22）

                               y ′ = − R cos α (t ) sin β (t )θx − R cosα (t ) cos β (t )θz           （23）

                               z′ = − R sin α (t )θx + R cos α (t ) cos β (t )θy                      （24）
                                                                                                            ．． ． ． ．
                         From Eqs(19)-(21) and Eqs(22)-(24),             the following relationship between α, β and θx, θy, θz
                         is obtained.

                               cos α (t ) sin β (t ) β + sin α (t ) cos β (t )α = cos α (t ) sin β (t )θy + sin α (t )θz    （25）

                              α = sin β (t )θx + cos β (t )θz                                                                 （26）

                               cos α (t ) cos β (t ) β − sin α (t ) sin β (t )α = − sin α (t )θx + cos α (t ) cos β (t )θy （27）

                         3.3 Analysis Method
                              We assume here that the impact force f(t) =(fx(t), fy(t), fz(t)) is given. The µ is assumed
                         to be constant for simplicity, and the Mr is considered to be negligibly small because the
                         ball rotates easily even on a slightly inclined table, as in the previous papers (1)-(3).
                              At first, the frictional force Fr=(Frx(t), 0, Frz(t)) is obtained from Eqs (14) and (15) by

                                                                                                                                     981
Journal of Solid Mechanics                                                                                                  Vol. 3, No. 7, 2009
and Materials Engineering

                         assuming      s(t ) ≠ 0 . The number of unknowns to be solved is 15, and they are
                         bx(t),by(t),bz(t), θx(t), θy(t), θz(t), sx(t), sy(t),sz(t), s(t), ρ (t ) ,δ(t),γ(t), α(t) andβ(t). The α(t)
                         andβ(t) can be related to θx(t), θy(t) and θz(t) with Eqs(25)-(27), and by(t)= sy(t)=0. The s(t)
                         ρ (t ) ,δ(t) andγ(t) are related to sx(t), sz(t), θx(t) and θz(t) through Eqs(10)-(13), and
                         sx(t)and sz(t) can be expressed with bx(t),bz(t), θx(t) and θz(t). Thus, the 15 unknowns are
                         reduced to 5 independent unknowns, bx(t), bz(t), θx(t), θy(t) and θz(t), which can be solved
                         from the 5 differential equations, Eqs(1), (3)-(6) by the finite difference method (Newmark
                         β =1/6) (5). The initial conditions are given as the 5 unknowns and their time derivatives are
                         zeros.
                                  If the first assumption, i.e., s(t ) ≠ 0 , is found not satisfied, Frx(t) and Frz(t) become
                         unknowns, but        sx (t) and sz (t) are known ( sx (t)= sz (t)=0). Because the number of
                         unknowns (=5) is unchanged, it is possible to solve the equations of motion, Eqs(1), (3)-(6).

                         4. Finite Element Analysis of Cue
                                                                                                                         Shaft
                                                                                  Tap         Ferrule
                                  Because the details of the finite
                         element analysis are described in the
                         previous paper(3) , only a brief description
                         necessary for the present paper will be
                                                                                        (a)    Finite element mesh of main part
                         given here. A cue is subject to the three                                       of cue
                         dimensional impact force f(t) =(fx(t), fy(t),
                         fz(t)), where t is time and the subscripts x, y                                               Male Screw
                                                                                  Tap Ferrule           Female Screw

                         and z represent the x, y and z components,
                         respectively. The displacement at the                                                 Shaft

                         impact       point    is    referred     to     as
                                                                                                        (b) Cross-section
                         c(t)=(cx(t), cy(t), cz(t)), and was calculated
                                                                                        Fig. 3 Finite element discretization of
                         with an elasto-dynamic finite element
                                                                                                         cue
                         method (Nastran (6)). We assumed that the
                         cue was supported freely, because the
                         constraint may be not so strong.
                              The cue was discretized with hexagonal or pentagonal elements (total number of
                         elements nodes were 6363 and 6184, respectively). The main part of the finite element mesh
                         is shown in Fig.3. The mesh size near the contact point was chosen to be nearly equal to the
                         radius of the Hertz contact area (7) to reduce the calculation error due to the assumption of a
                         concentrated force instead of a distributed one.

                         5. Coupling velocities of cue and ball at impact point

                              We assume that there is no slip at the impact point between a cue and a ball, because
                         the slip is usually avoided by applying chalk on the tip of the tap to increase the frictional
                         force. By equating the velocities of the cue and the ball at the contact point, following

                                                                                                                                          982
Journal of Solid Mechanics                                                                                       Vol. 3, No. 7, 2009
and Materials Engineering

                         equations are obtained,

                                               {                                             }
                               v cosϕ − c x − bx + R cosα (t ) sin β (t )θy + R sin α (t )θz = 0       （28）

                               v sin ϕ + c − {− R cosα (t ) sin β (t )θ − R cosα (t ) cos β (t )θ } = 0 (29)
                                            y                            x                             z

                               − c − {b − R sinα (t )θ + R cosα (t ) cosβ (t )θ } = 0
                                  z     z               x                         y
                                                                                                           （30）

                         where the positive directions of c x and c z are taken opposite to those of the x and the z
                         axes in Fig.1. The last two terms in the braces { } in these equations are the x ′, y ′ and
                         z ′ components of the velocity due to rotation at the impact point on the ball as shown with
                         Eqs (22)-(24).
                                 Making use of Eqs (28)-(30), the fx(t), fy(t) and fz(t) are determined as follows. We
                         consider to determine fx(tn+1) , fy(tn+1) and fz(tn+1) (n=0,1,2,…, tn+1= tn + ∆t), when fx(tn)
                         fy(tn) and fz(tn) ( fx(t0)= fy(t0)= fz(t0)=0) are known.
                         (a)     Assume fx(tn+1), fy(tn+1) and fz(tn+1). Employ the Lagrange method using the values at
                                 tn-2 ,tn-1 and tn+1 for 2 ≤ n to reduce the iterative number
                                                                                                 (8)
                                                                                                       .
                         (b)     Calculate cx(tn+1), cy(tn+1), cz(tn+1) and their time derivatives with the finite element
                                 method (section 4)
                         (c)     Calculate bx(tn+1), bz(tn+1), θx(tn+1), θy(tn+1), θz(tn+1), the other unknowns and their time
                                 derivatives with the finite difference method (section 3)
                         (d)     Evaluate the square sum of residuals of the left hand sides of Eqs (28) - (30).
                         (e)     Employ the downhill simplex method(4) with the cost function defined as the above
                                 square sum of residuals, and modify fx(tn+1), fy(tn+1) and fz(tn+1).
                         (f)     Repeat (a)-(e) until the cost function becomes small enough.
                         (g)     Repeat above procedures until F(tn+1) becomes small enough.

                                  All unknowns including the ball motion during impact are calculated in the above
                         procedures. The ball motion after impact is obtained by solving Eqs (1)-(15) after
                         substituting F(t)=0.

                         6. Verification of Analytical Result

                         6.1 Experimental Verification
                                 An experiment where a ball was hit on its upper left part in an inclined direction was conducted.
                         The displacement of the ball was measured by taking a movie from above using a high speed camera
                         (Nobby tech Ltd make, Phantom v4.2 model, 2000 frames/s, 0.19 Mega pixels). A still photo was
                         also taken from horizontal direction using a usual digital camera (Nikon D50, 6.10 Mega pixels). The
                         angles β(0) and φ were measured directly from the movie and photo, while α(0)and v were obtained
                         indirectly from them by making use of the geometrical relationship. The results were α(0)=12D , β(0)=
                         20D , φ= 12D and v= 1.5 m/s (See Fig.1). The radius of the ball was R=0.0275 m and its mass
                         M=0.169kg.

                                                                                                                               983
Journal of Solid Mechanics                                                                                                                                                          Vol. 3, No. 7, 2009
and Materials Engineering

                                 In the numerical prediction, the coefficient                                                                                                        Experimental
                                                                                                                                     0.6
                         of friction was assumed as µ =0.2, the frictional                                                                                                           Analytical

                                                                                      D isp la c e m e n t in x- d ire c tion [m ]
                         moments for rolling was assumed as Mr =0, as in
                         the previous papers(1)-(3). The frictional moments                                                          0.4

                         for spinning, Ms was taken as Ms =0.022 Nm by
                         performing a preliminary experiment, where a
                         movie was taken using the same high speed                                                                   0.2

                         camera from above a ball spinning without
                         rolling and sliding, and the decreasing rate of the
                                                                                                                                       0
                         spinning velocity was measured. The material                                                                      0      －0.001        － 0.002      － 0.003         － 0.004

                         properties of the cue are the same as those for the                                                                          Displacement in z-direction [m]

                         analysis 1 (‘Normal’) in the subsection 7.1, and                             Fig.4                                    Comparison              of     analytical            of      and
                         the time increment in the finite difference method                                                                       experimental results of ball trajectories
                         was taken as ∆t = 5 × 10-5s, as in the previous
                         papers(1)-(3).                                                                                              0.6

                                                                                   Displacement in x-direction [m]
                                 The experimental and numerical          ball
                         trajectories for 0 ≤ t ≤ 0.5 s are compared                                                                 0.4

                         in Fig.4, where the displacement in the z
                         direction is enlarged 200 times, because they
                                                                                                                                                                            Trajectory 1 : α (0)= 0°, φ = 0°
                                                                                                                                     0.2                                    Trajectory 2 : α (0)=0.1°, φ =0.1°
                         are much small compared with that in the x                                                                                                         Trajectory 3 : α (0)= 1°, φ = 1°
                                                                                                                                                                            Trajectory 4 : α (0)= 5°, φ = 5°
                         direction.        The       symbol     representing                                                                                                Trajectory 5 : α (0)= 10°, φ = 10°
                                                                                                                                                                            Trajectory 6 : α (0)= 12°, φ = 12°

                         measurement error (|------|) indicates the                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                           0                －   0.01                   －   0.02
                         length corresponding to 1 pixel. It is found                                                                               Displacement in z-direction [m]

                         from this result that the ball trajectory                                    Fig.5 Effect of impact condition on ball
                         predicted numerically agrees well with the                                                                                    trajectories

                                               Table1 Material constants of cue used for analysis
                                                                                                                                                    Wave Velocity
                                                           Young’s            Mass
                                                                   Poisson’s                                                                            in Bar
                                                  Parts    Modulus           Density
                                                                      Ratio
                                                            E(GPa)           (kg/m3)                                                                       E/ρ(m/s)

                                   Analysis1      Shaft          12          0.1                                                           602                     4464.7
                                   (Normal)

                                   Analysis2      Shaft           6          0.1                                                           301                     4464.7
                                     (Soft)

                                   Analysis3      Shaft          24          0.1                                                           1204                    4464.7
                                    (Stiff)

                                   Analysis4      Shaft          12          0.1                                                           301                            6314
                                    (Light)

                                   Analysis5      Shaft          12          0.1                                                           1204                           3157
                                    (Heavy)

                                                                                                                                                                                                       984
Journal of Solid Mechanics                                                                                                                                                               Vol. 3, No. 7, 2009
and Materials Engineering

                                                                                                                                            X                                                        Normal
                         one      obtained            experimentally                                                                                                                                 Soft         fX(t)
                                                                                                            500                  Z                                                                   Stiff
                         within the measurement error. It is                                                                          Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Normal
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Soft         fY(t)
                                                                                                            400                                                                                      Stiff
                         noted that the ball trajectory is                                                                                                                                           Normal
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Soft         fZ(t)

                                                                            Impact Force [N]
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Stiff
                         deviated from the x direction                                                      300

                         immediately after the impact, and                                                  200
                         then is curved.
                                                                                                            100

                         6.2 Relationship between Impact                                                       0
                                                                                                                    0                                  0.5                                   1
                         Direction and Ball Trajectory                                                     -100
                                 Numerical analyses were                                                                                             Time [s/1000]

                         carried out using the present                                                                           (a) Results of analyses 1,2 and 3

                         method for various values of α(0)                                                                                  X                                                    Normal
                                                                                                             500                 Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Light        fX(t)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Heavy
                         and φ, and the ball trajectories                                                                                                                                        Normal
                                                                                                                                      Y                                                          Light        fY(t)
                         obtained are shown in Fig.5,                                                        400                                                                                 Heavy
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Normal
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Light        fZ(t)
                         where v and β(0) are assumed as                                                                                                                                         Heavy

                                                                              Impact Force [N]
                                                                                                             300
                         v= 1.5 m/s and β(0)= 20D . It is
                         seen from the figure that the                                                       200

                         radius of curvature of the ball
                                                                                                             100
                         trajectory is large for the impact
                         on its almost exactly left part                                                       0
                                                                                                                    0                                0.5                             1
                         with a slightly inclined cue, and
                                                                                                            -100
                         this     result   agrees           with    an                                                                            Time [s/1000]
                         empirical one.                                                                                    (b) Results of analyses 1, 4 and 5

                                 In the previous paper (3),                                                     Fig.6 Effect of material properties on

                         an experiment on the movement of                                                                  impact                 force
                                                                                                                                                           0.8
                         the ball hit at α(0)=0, β(0)= 20D
                                                                                                                        Normal            Soft
                         in     the   direction           φ= 0     was                                                  Stiff             Light
                                                                                                                        Heavy
                         performed, and it was observed
                                                                         Displacement in x-direction [m]

                                                                                                                                                           0.6
                         that the ball trajectory was straight,
                         but deviated from the x direction
                         (See Fig.1). The present numerical                                                                                                0.4

                         result shown in Fig.5 is consistent
                         with the experimental one in the
                                           (3)
                         previous paper          .                                                                                                         0.2

                         7.      Effects             of     Material                                                                                         0
                                                                                                           -0.008       -0.006       -0.004       -0.002         0   －   0.002   －   0.004       －   0.006    －   0.008
                         Properties of Shaft                                                                                              Displacement in z-direction [m]

                         7.1 Material Properties
                                                                                                             Fig.7 Effect of material properties on ball
                                 In order to investigate the
                                                                                                                         trajectory

                                                                                                                                                                                                              985
Journal of Solid Mechanics                                                                                                                               Vol. 3, No. 7, 2009
and Materials Engineering

                                                                                                                                   Normal
                         effects of material properties of a shaft                                                                 Soft
                                                                                                                                   Stiff
                         of a cue, numerical analyses were                                          1.5                            Light
                                                                                                                                   Heavy
                         performed for        α(0) = 15D , β(0) = 20D ,
                         φ= 15D and v= 1.5 m/s. Five kinds of

                                                                                  Velocity [m/s]
                                                                                                         1
                         material constants of a shaft shown in
                         Table 1 were used. The following
                         material constants of the tap and the                                      0.5

                         ferrule were common to each cue ;
                         Young’s      modulus               E=0.28    GPa,
                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                             0         0.05        0.1           0.15      0.2       0.25
                         Poison’s         ratio         ν    =0.4,    mass
                                                                                                                                           Time [s]
                         density=420 kgm-3 for the tap, and
                         E=2.57       GPa,              ν    =0.4,    mass                                         (a) 0 < t < 0.27 s
                                                   -3
                         density=1074 kgm for the ferrule. The
                         other constants were the same as those                                                          Normal
                                                                                                                         Soft
                         in subsection 6.1.                                                        1.6                   Stiff
                                                                                                                         Light
                                                                                                                         Heavy
                               In Table 1, both the Young’s modulus
                                                                                                   1.2

                                                                               Velocity [m/s]
                         and the mass density of a shaft were chosen
                         0.5 and 2 times large for analyses 2 (‘Soft’)
                                                                                                   0.8

                         and 3 (‘Stiff’)          respectively, compared
                         with those for analysis 1 (‘Normal’). This                                0.4

                         choice results in the same wave velocity in
                                                                                                    0
                         bar, as shown in the last column. The mass                                          0                           0.001                      0.002

                         density for analyses 4 (‘Light’) and 5                                                                      Time [s]

                         (‘Heavy’) were chosen 0.5 and 2 times
                                                                                                                 (b)      0 < t < 2×10-3 s
                         larger    than      analysis        1   (‘Normal’),
                         respectively. The wave velocity in bar is                  Fig.8                        Effect       of    material            properties      on
                         different for these analyses as in the last                                         velocities due to sliding and rotation
                         column.

                         7.2 Impact Force and Ball Trajectory
                              The time variations of the impact force are shown in Fig.6(a) for analyses 1-3, and in
                         Fig.6(b) for analyses 1,4,5. It is seen from these figures that the absolute value of
                         longitudinal component of impact force, |fX(t)|, is much larger than the other components for
                         every analysis, it increases with increase in the Young’s modulus, and the duration time of
                         impact decreases with increase in the wave velocity in bar.
                               The ball trajectories for 0 ≤ t ≤ 0.5 s are shown in Fig.7, where the displacements in the z
                         direction are enlarged 50 times compared with those in the x direction. It is observed that the ball
                         trajectory is deviated from the x direction immediately after the impact, then it is curved, and it
                         becomes straight after a while. The arrows in the figure indicate the points where the curved
                         trajectories change to the straight ones. It is found that the ball velocity, the deviation of the the ball

                                                                                                                                                                       986
Journal of Solid Mechanics                                                                                                                                                                         Vol. 3, No. 7, 2009
and Materials Engineering

                                                                                                                            2                                                                                         3000
                         trajectory and the radius of curvature of                                                                                        Normal
                                                                                                                                                          Soft
                         the ball trajectory immediately after the                                                                                        Stiff
                                                                                                                                                          Light

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Angle Velocity [Degree/s]
                         impact increase with increase in the                                                             1.5                             Heavy                                                       2250

                                                                                                  Slip Velocity [m/s]
                         Young’s modulus and density of a shaft.
                                                                                                                                                                                        θz
                                                                                                                                                                                              right scale

                                                                                                                            1                                                                                         1500

                         7.3 Slip and Rotational Velocities
                                  The time variations of the
                                                                                                                          0.5                                                                                         750
                         velocities of a ball due to the slip                                                                                       sx
                                                                                                                                                left scale
                         between a ball and a table              s and
                         the      rotation     ρ   are   shown      in
                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                0                    0.1                     0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0

                                                                                                                                                                   Time [s]
                         Fig.8(a) for 0 ≤ t ≤ 0.27 s and in
                                                            −3                                                                                                ．
                         Fig.8(b) for 0 ≤ t ≤ 2 × 10 s. It is                                                                                    (a)          θz and              sx
                         seen that the s increases rapidly
                         within a short impact time (about                                                                                                                                     Normal
                                                                                                                          1200                                                                 Soft
                             -3
                         10 s) and then decreases linearly up

                                                                                              Angle Velocity [Degree/s]
                                                                                                                                                                                               Stiff
                                                                                                                                                                                               Light
                         to zero, and s is large for a stiff or                                                           900                                                                 Heavy

                         heavy shaft. It is also seen that
                         ρ increases linearly after a rapid                                                               600

                         increase in a short impact time and                                                               300

                         then it becomes constant from the
                         time when         s becomes zero. This                                                                0
                                                                                                                                    0                                0.25                                       0.5

                         time corresponds to the arrow in                                                                                                          Time [s]
                                                                                                                                          ．
                         Fig.7. The x, y and z components of                                                                    (b)       θy (spinning angular velocity)
                         s and ρ are shown in Figs 9 (a),
                         (b) and (c). It is found from                                       0                                                                                                              0
                                        ．                                                               0                                     0.1                           0.2

                         Fig.9 (a) that θz and sx have                                                                   left scale
                                                                                                                                        sz
                                                                                                                                                                                                            -50
                                                                                           -0.1
                         similar tendencies to those in

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Angle Velocity [Degree/s]
                                                                                                                                                                                                            -100
                         Fig.8(a). The spinning angular
                                                                     Slip Velocity [m/s]

                                  ．                                                        -0.2
                         velocity θy is found from Fig.9                                                                                                                                                    -150

                         (b) to show a similar tendency                                                                                                                                                     -200
                                                                                           -0.3
                         to that of  s in Fig.8, although                                                                                      θx                                            Normal
                                                                                                                                                                                               Soft
                         it remains longer than s .
                                                                                                                                                                                                            -250
                                                                                                                                         right scale                                           Stiff
                                                                                           -0.4                                                                                                Light
                                  The reason why a ball is                                                                                                                                     Heavy        -300

                         deviated     in     the    –z direction
                                                                                           -0.5                                                                                                             -350

                         immediately after the impact and                                                                                                     Time [s]
                                                                                                                                                    ．
                         then returns back in the +z direction                                                                          (c)         θx and           sz
                         after a while can be explained from               Fig.9 Effect of material properties on velocity
                         Fig.9(c) as follows. For example,                     components due to sliding and rotation
                         we consider the case of Analysis 1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  987
Journal of Solid Mechanics                                                                                     Vol. 3, No. 7, 2009
and Materials Engineering
                                                                  ．
                         (‘Normal’). Because sz =-0.16 m/s and R θx=-0.06 m/s immediately after the impact ( Note｜ sz ｜
                               ．                                                                                          ．
                         ＞｜R θx｜), the ball is deviated in –z direction at first. After a while, s decreases to zero and θx
                         becomes a negative constant value. The ball, therefore, returns back in the +z direction.

                         8. Conclusions

                                The impact characteristics of a cue for the case where a ball was hit on its upper left
                         (or right) part to make a curved trajectory were numerically analyzed by extending the
                         effective method developed in the previous papers(1)-(3). In the extended method, the
                         dynamic response of a cue was calculated with the elastic finite element method. The ball
                         motion was analyzed with the finite difference method by expressing the ball velocity as the
                         sum of the velocity due to a roll and the velocity due to a slip (between a ball and a table) in
                         a different direction. The finite element analysis for a cue and the finite difference analysis
                         for a ball were coupled by equating the velocities of a cue and a ball at the impact point.
                         The method was verified experimentally by using a high speed camera.
                               Numerical simulations were carried out using the extended method for several sets of
                         shaft materials and main results are as follows:
                         1.   A ball trajectory becomes curved when the hitting point on a ball and the inclination of
                              a cue are high.
                         2.   The ball velocity, the deviation of the ball trajectory from the hitting direction and the
                              radius of curvature of the ball trajectory immediately after the impact increase with
                              increase in the Young’s modulus and density of a shaft.
                         3.   A ball rotates at first with a slip between a ball and a table in a different direction (the
                              trajectory is curved during this period) and then rotates without any slip making a
                              straight trajectory, and the point where the slip disappears is farther for larger Young’s
                              modulus and density of a shaft.
                         4.   The impact force increases with increase in the stiffness or the mass density of a shaft,
                              and its duration time decreases with increase in the wave velocity through a shaft.

                                The extended numerical method can be usefully used for designing a cue, because
                         effects of not only material properties but also geometries of the tap, ferrule and shaft of a
                         cue on the impact force, the ball velocity and the ball trajectory can be quantitatively
                         predicted.

                         Acknowledgements

                                The authors would like to express their sincere thanks to Mr. M.Takahira, Mr.
                         H.Wakui(Adam Japan Co.Ltd), Mr.M.Sudo (Billiards and Darts Lab. Co.Ltd), Mr.
                         K.Nagaya and Ms. K.Lee (Japan Professional Billiards League) for their useful discussions
                         and supports.

                                                                                                                             988
Journal of Solid Mechanics                                                                           Vol. 3, No. 7, 2009
and Materials Engineering

                         References

                         1.   Shimamura, S. Suga, K. Ezawa, Y. & Aoki, S., Numerical evaluation of impact
                              characteristics of cue in billiards, Transaction of the Japan Society of Mechanical
                              Engineers, Series C, Vol. 73, No. 729 (2007), pp. 1480-1486.
                         2.   Shimamura, S. Suga, K. Ezawa, Y. & Aoki, S., Effects of Material Properties of Cue on
                              Impact Behaviour in Follow and Draw Shots in Billiards, Journal of International
                              Sports Engineering Association, Vol. 10 (2008), pp. 221-228.
                         3.   Shimamura, S. Suga, K. Ezawa, Y. & Aoki, S., Numerical Evaluation of Impact
                              Characteristics of Cue in Billiards (Case Where Spin is Given on Ball), Journal of the
                              Society of Materials Science, Japan, Vol. 57, No.10 (2008), pp.1043-1048.
                         4.   Press. H, William, Flannery. P, Brian, Teukolsky. A, Saul and Vetterling. T, William,
                              NUMERICAL RECIPES in C, (1993), pp. 295-299, Gijutu Hyoron Sha.
                         5.   Warburton, GB., Formulas for errors for initial displacement and velocity problems
                              using the Newmark method. Earthquake Engineering & Structural Dynamics, Vol. 18,
                              No.4 (1989), pp. 565-573.
                         6.   Nnmerical Simulation Tech Co.,Ltd, Femap with NX Nastran Version 9.2J users guide,
                              (2006), Chapter2, p. 487-545. Chapter7, pp. 274-347, Nnmerical Simulation Tech
                              Co.,Ltd.
                         7.   Moriwaki, I. and Miyata, T., Measurement of Contact Stress on Tooth Flank of Spur
                              Gear Subject to Static Load : Considerations of Contact Condition by Hertzian contact
                              theory, the JSME international conference on motion and power transmissions, No.
                              04-17(2004-11), pp. 174-177.
                         8.   Robert, S., Algorithms in C++, (1994), p. 597, Kindai Kagaku Sha.

                                                                                                                   989
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/end_of_game_frozen_rail_shots_part_i.pdf
title: End-of-game frozen-rail shots
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“End-of-game frozen-rail shots”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. See the website for details.

    Last month, I illustrated a rail cut shot where squirt aim-compensation is important. The shot
layout is shown in Diagram 1. The 8-ball is frozen to the end rail, and the cue ball (CB) is near
the center of the table. This is a fairly common end-of-game situation that can come up in 8-ball
or 9-ball. This and similar situations can also come up mid-game in 9-ball, so it is important to
think about and practice various options. In this article, I present several options for you to
consider.

                                                         the 8-ball is
                                                           frozen to
                                                             the rail
                                                                         8
                               the cue ball
                                is close to
                                the center
                               of the table

                                      Diagram 1 Shot layout

     Diagram 2 shows the offensive option discussed last month ... the rail cut shot. Running
English makes the shot much easier than it appears, provided you adjust your aim for squirt (see
last month’s article) and contact the rail first. NV B.11 shows demonstrations of the shots and
explains various concerns. In general, with rail cut shots, there is a surprisingly wide range of
possibilities for the CB path, while still making the shot (especially if the 8-ball were closer to the
pocket). My new high-speed video DVD has a feature on this. A good summary of CB control
options, and how to achieve them, can be viewed in the DVD excerpts I have posted under the
HSV DVD link on my website. The final CB path depends a lot on whether the CB hits the OB
before, during, or after rail contact. With the shot in Diagram 2, it is difficult to create various CB
paths while still pocketing the 8-ball because of the distance and angle involved, but the CB path
shown in the diagram can be achieved fairly consistently, as long as you hit the rail first.
                       fast
                       medium                                     hit the rail first
                       slow                                    with running English

                     aim adjusted
                       for squirt                                                       8

                              Diagram 2 Rail cut shot offensive option

               NV B.11 - End-of-game rail cut shot offensive option
normal video

     Diagram 3 shows another offensive option that is probably more aggressive (lower
percentage) for most people. In this option, as demonstrated in NV B.12, the 8-ball is banked
into the bottom-left corner pocket. As described in the video, a double-kiss is a concern,
depending on how far the CB is from the center of the table. The video explains and illustrates
how faster speed can be used to help avoid the double kiss. I also use right English in the video
(as shown in Diagram 3). This isn’t required to pocket the 8-ball, but it does help kill the CB
motion, with reverse English off the two rails. Without right English, there is a chance for a
scratch in the bottom side pocket. I thank “Jal” on the BD CCB online forum for making me think
about the right English more than I did at first. Another option would be a reverse bank to the top-
left corner pocket. I thank “JoeW” on the BD CCB online forum for pointing this out. A
disadvantage with this shot would be more CB motion and an increased possibility for a scratch.
Also, a reverse bank can be tougher for some people to aim. The advantage is there is no
possibility for a double kiss. Regardless of which bank you might choose, a bank is probably not
a high-percentage option in this case for most people, especially on a table with “tight” pockets.
                       fast
                       medium                             reverse English
                       slow                             helps kill CB motion

                                                                                           8

                                Diagram 3 Bank shot offensive option

                NV B.12 - End-of-game bank shot offensive option
normal video

     Diagram 4 shows a defensive option called a kiss-back shot. As demonstrated in NV B.13,
you must hit the 8-ball fairly squarely with draw. The 8-ball double kisses the CB and remains
close to the foot rail. With appropriate speed, the CB can end up close to the head rail. This shot
option can leave your opponent in an even tougher place than you faced originally. If the 8-ball is
in fact frozen to the end rail (i.e., there is no gap between the ball and cushion at all), you need to
make sure you use enough speed to have the CB touch the head rail. If it doesn’t, the shot will
be a foul (because the rules require a ball to make new contact with a rail after ball contact) and
your opponent will get ball in hand. The 2nd shot in NV B.13 is actually a foul. I thank
“BigRigTom” on the BD CCB for pointing this out. The possibility for a foul makes the rail-frozen
kiss-back shot a little less desirable as an option. With a small gap, there would be no risk of this
type of a foul, and the shot would still work as demonstrated. However, the larger the gap, the
more accurate you need to be with the squareness of the hit.
                        fast
                        medium
                        slow

                                                                                        8

                                                                                   8
                                                  create distance
                    cue ball                    between the balls,
                  rail contact               leaving them as close to
                 is required if                the rails as possible
                  the 8-ball is
               frozen to the rail

                                    Diagram 4 Kiss-back shot safety

                NV B.13 - End-of-game kiss-back safety option
normal video

      Diagram 5 shows another safety option. Here, you use a soft cut shot to create separation
between the CB and 8-ball on opposite sides of the table. Ideally, you can leave the CB frozen to
or close to the rail. NV B.14 demonstrates and discusses the shot. If the 8-ball were away from
the rail some, a half-ball hit would be used to get similar deflected angles and speeds for both the
CB and 8-ball (see TP A.16 for the math and physics details). Because the 8-ball is frozen on the
rail, you need to use a little less than a half-ball hit to achieve the desired separation. With the
final ball locations shown in Diagram 5, your opponent is left with an attempt at a fairly difficult
bank or return-safety shot. Your opponent certainly has fewer options than with the original
layout in Diagram 1.
                                           fast
                                           medium
                                           slow

                                                                              8
                                                    slightly less than
                                                       a half-ball hit

                                                             8

                                     Diagram 5 Cut shot safety

                  NV B.14 - End-of-game cut shot safety option
normal video

                  TP A.16 – Final ball speeds and directions for natural roll shots
technical proof

    Which option would you choose if you were faced with the shot in Diagram 1? You should
think about it some and then practice all of the options above ... and then think about it some
more. Personally, I would usually prefer the running English rail cut shot option, especially if I
were playing a better opponent. In that case, I think it is better to try to win the game on this shot
rather than give my opponent the chance to make a good bank shot or play an even better safety
on me; although, if I were playing a lesser opponent, I would most likely choose one of the safety
options instead. Rail conditions and consistency, and pocket “size” can also play a big part in the
decision, especially with the bank-shot option. The exact CB position might also be important in
the decision. For example, the running English rail cut shot is much easier with more approach
angle into the rail (i.e., if the CB is farther from the center of the table), and gets a lot tougher as
the CB gets closer to the center of the table.

     I hope you now have a better awareness and appreciation for end-of-game options when the
final ball is frozen to a rail.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/end_of_game_frozen_rail_shots_part_ii.pdf
title: End-of-game frozen-rail shots - part II
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“End-of-game frozen-rail shots – part II”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. See the website for details.

     In my May article, I illustrated several options for the shot layout shown in Diagram 1. The 8-
ball is frozen to the end rail, and the cue ball (CB) is near the center of the table. This is a fairly
common end-of-game situation that can come up in 8-ball or 9-ball. This and similar situations
can also come up mid-game in 9-ball, so it is important to think about and practice various
options. In my May article (which you can view on my website), I presented an offensive rail cut
shot option using natural English (see NV B.11), an offensive bank-shot option where a double
kiss might be a concern (see NV B.12), a defensive kiss-back safety option (see NV B.13), and a
basic defensive cut-shot option (see NV B.14). This month, I want to present and discuss a few
more options discussed recently on the BD-CCB and AZB online forums.

                                                         the 8-ball is
                                                           frozen to
                                                             the rail
                                                                         8
                               the cue ball
                                is close to
                                the center
                               of the table

                                      Diagram 1 Shot layout

                NV B.11 - End-of-game frozen rail cut shot offensive option
                NV B.12 - End-of-game frozen bank shot offensive option
normal video
                NV B.13 - End-of-game frozen kiss-back safety option
                NV B.14 - End-of-game frozen cut shot safety option

    Diagram 2 shows an alternative to the bank shot shown in my May article. With the original
bank shot option (see NV B.12), where the 8-ball is banked in the bottom left corner pocket, there
is a chance for a double kiss depending on the specific cue ball position. Diagram 2 shows a
reverse bank shot offensive option, where the 8-ball is banked straight back to the top left corner
pocket. NV B.15 demonstrates the shot, provides some advice, and discusses several concerns.
This bank might be more difficult for some people to aim, because the cut angle is larger than
with the original bank, but a double kiss is not as much a concern. However, at slower speeds, a
double kiss is possible with this shot also (see the example in the video). Faster speed helps the
8-ball compress into the rail cushion more, allowing the CB to easily clear the double kiss. As
shown in Diagram 2, left (inside/reverse) English helps kill the CB’s motion, keeping the CB close
to the foot rail. This helps create separation between the CB and 8-ball in case you miss (see the
examples in the video). The English also helps prevent a scratch by preventing the CB from
moving around the table.

                                                                                       8

                                      fast
                                                           reverse English
                                      medium             helps kill CB motion,
                                      slow               keeping the CB close
                                                            to the foot rail

                       Diagram 2 Reverse bank shot offensive option

               NV B.15 - End-of-game frozen reverse bank shot offensive option
normal video

     Diagram 3 shows a three-rail bank two-way shot option. This shot might be more difficult
than some of the other options presented here and in my May article; but with a little practice, it
might be worth considering. The main goal of the shot is to bank the 8-ball three rails into the
bottom side pocket. A secondary goal, in case you miss the shot, is to leave a tough shot for
your opponent. That’s why it is called a two-way shot ... it is both an offensive and defensive
shot, depending on the outcome. With a miss and good speed, it is fairly easy to leave your
opponent an even more difficult shot with fewer options; although the speed of the shot is
important (see several examples in the video). The ideal miss (e.g., if the 8-ball misses just past
the side pocket) would have the CB come to rest close to the center of the head rail, with the 8-
ball coming to rest close to its original position. A shown in Diagram 3, right (outside/running)
English helps send the 8-ball in the desired direction and helps bring the CB back up table.
                                                                                               8

                                                       fast
                                                       medium
                                                       slow

                         Diagram 3 Three-rail bank two-way shot option

                 NV B.16 - End-of-game frozen 3-rail two-way shot option
normal video

     Diagram 4 shows a final “option” called a reverse rail cut shot. A demonstration of this shot
can be viewed via a link in the “Online Video Collection” section of my website, under “Trick
shots” (see the Joe Tucker link under “impossible shots”). The reverse rail cut is the first shot in
the video. Obviously, this “option” would not be considered in actual play ... it is much too
difficult, with too much risk (e.g., there is a possibility of fouling by missing the 8-ball, or selling out
to your opponent if you don’t pocket the ball). It’s just a show-off proposition shot, made a little
easier by Joe’s fancy stroke-guiding laser gizmo. If stroke-guiding laser gizmos were legal, pool
would be a much easier game. I’m glad gizmos like this are not legal in actual play.
                       fast
                       medium
                                                              extreme English,
                       slow
                                                              with perfect squirt
                                                               compensation

                                                                                        8

                Diagram 4 Laser-assisted extreme cut reverse rail-cut option

     Which option would you choose if you were faced with the shot in Diagram 1? You should
think about it some and then practice all of the options above and in my May article ... and then
think about it some more. Personally, my favorite option is the two-way shot in Diagram 3 and
NV B.16. However, I’m not sure I would use it in a game situation, unless I was playing a lesser
player. Although, if I were playing a lesser player, I would probably choose one of the defensive
options from my May article (e.g., the cut-shot safety in NV B.14 or the kiss-back safety in NV
B.13) instead. If I were playing a much better opponent, I still like the offensive running-English
rail shot cut option in NV B.11. With a tough opponent, I think it is better to try to win the game
rather than give him or her the chance to make a good bank shot or play an even better safety on
me. Rail conditions and consistency, and pocket “size” can also play a big part in the decision.
The exact CB position might also be important in the decision. For example, the running English
rail cut shot in NV B.11 is much easier with more approach angle into the rail (i.e., if the CB is
farther from the center of the table), and gets a lot tougher as the CB gets closer to the center of
the table.

     I hope you now have a better awareness and appreciation for end-of-game options when the
final ball is frozen to a rail.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/equipment_care.pdf
title: Equipment Care
topics: technical_proofs, banks_kicks_rails
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Equipment Care”                                                            ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Recently, I posted online video NV J.79 demonstrating how to how to clean, maintain, and care for a pool
cue, a cue tip, a pool table, and pool balls. Below, I summarize important points in each category.

Cue
    Basically, to take care of your cue, just keep it clean, and chalk the tip regularly. If you use a shooting
glove, the shaft will automatically stay cleaner. You are also more likely to get a consistent feel on every shot.
Before or after every use (or anytime it feels dirty) wipe the shaft with a damp towel. You should also rub it
dry with a non-wet towel.

    If you have a wood shaft that is really dirty, use a damp piece of Magic Eraser. That will usually remove
most of the dirt and stains, and it won’t abrade the soft wood grain. If you want to remove more dirt and
stains, you can use a scouring pad or fine-grit sandpaper; although, these will wear down the shaft slightly,
especially the soft parts of the grain.

    When you are done with deep cleaning, it is a good idea to burnish the shaft, either with a dollar bill or
with a piece of leather, as demonstrated in the video. Burnishing helps seal the grain and provide a smooth
and shiny finish. Image 1 shows the before and after pictures of a cleaned and burnished shaft. Cleaning
and burnishing can really restore a filthy and lightly-scratched cue.

                                  Image 1 Shaft before and after cleaning

     If you use a carbon-fiber shaft, it doesn’t need much care. You can just wipe it down with a damp towel.
If that doesn’t get it completely clean and smooth, you can use a little dishwashing liquid. Just be sure to
wipe off all the soap residue with a clean and damp towel. If the shaft is really dirty or oily, you can use

Billiards Digest                                                                                        June, 2021
rubbing alcohol to make it squeaky clean. And again, if you want to keep your shaft clean, use a playing
glove, which will keep the shaft clean for a long time.

Cue Tip
    You don’t need to shape a tip unless the top flattens. This is less a concern with a harder tip, which will
also last longer. I often use the same hard tip for years without needing to shape or scuff it. Shaping and
scuffing wears the tip down faster, requiring more frequent replacement. But shaping and scuffing can
restore a tip when necessary. As shown in the video, there are many tools available for this purpose.

     There is no need to scuff a tip unless it is no longer holding chalk. Chalking with a typical abrasive chalk
naturally keeps the tip surface in good shape, unless you miscue a lot. It is best to have a tip rounded to the
radius of a US nickel or dime. If your tip is really flat, you can use a shaper tool to make it round again.
Sometimes, the tip surface will be a little rough, especially in the center, after shaping. This really isn’t a
concern, but you can use fine-grit sandpaper to smooth it down if you want. When you are done, chalk up the
tip, and you’re ready to play. Image 2 shows the before and after pictures of a shaped and chalked tip.

                                  Image 2 Cue tip before and after shaping

     Do not use cosmetic style chalks that go on the tip smoothly like lipstick. Because they go on without any
abrasion, they don’t keep the tip surface fresh. They also stick to the CB too easily, which can cause more-
frequent and larger cling (AKA skid or kick). Otherwise, the type and brand of chalk you use really doesn’t
matter much in terms of performance. For more information, see the chalk comparison resource page linked
in the YouTube video description.

    Any time you miscue, the tip will have a skid mark that can cause another bad hit in the future. Always be
sure to scuff the spot carefully with aggressive chalking (or if necessary, with a scuffer tool or fine-grit
sandpaper).

    The only times you need to replace a tip is when it no longer holds chalk even after scuffing, gets
damaged or the glue joint fails, or when it wears down to the point where there is very little tip material
remaining on the shoulder of the ferrule. See the link in the YouTube video description if you want to learn
how to replace a tip yourself. If you use a hard tip, chalk properly, and resist scuffing or re-shaping (unless it
is absolutely necessary), a tip can last a long time, even several years with regular use.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        June, 2021
Table
     Table brushing is not generally recommended since it makes a cloud that is probably not healthy to
breathe (and it settles on everything). But if you do not plan to vacuum, brushing is a fast and easy option for
getting chalk and dust off the top surface. Just be sure to vacuum or shake out the brush first before using it
on the table.

    You should vacuum and wipe the table daily with very heavy use. weekly with moderate use, and monthly
with light use. A small portable vacuum with a hose attachment and bristle brush is the easiest to use. It is
good to vacuum spots that look extra dirty first. Then vacuum the tops of the cushions and under the
cushions and along the rail grooves, where dirt and dust like to collect. Then vacuum the entire table surface,
one quadrant at a time. It is generally recommended to always vacuum and later wipe in the same direction
(e.g., toward the foot rail), as compared to rubbing back and forth, but this really isn’t a concern with modern
high-quality cloths.

    If you are lazy or have many tables to clean, you might prefer using a Roomba (see Image 3). You just
need to push a button to get it started, and it automatically vacuums the entire table. The rotating bristles also
get under the cushions well. My wife and I call our Roomba “Wall-E.”

                        Image 3 Wall-E happily vacuuming the table automatically

    After brushing or vacuuming, wipe the table down with a damp cloth. It is best to use a micro-fiber cloth,
but a cotton cloth works fine as long as you pick up any lint left behind. The cloth should only be damp and it
should not drip when you wring it. First wipe any spots that look extra dirty. Then wipe the rails and
cushions. Then wipe the whole table, one quadrant at a time.

    It is a good idea to use a spare piece of cloth as a breaking pad, especially if you are practicing the break.
Without the break cloth, you will create permanent burn or skid marks on the table cloth. Also use a spare
piece of cloth if practicing jump or massé shots so burn or skid marks will appear on the spare piece of cloth
and not on the table cloth. The other approach is to just not worry about burn or skid marks. They are a
natural part of the game and just show that you play a lot.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        June, 2021
    A table cover is a good idea, especially if the table is in a dusty environment or if you have pets or young
kids. A cover will keep the table much cleaner and you won’t need to vacuum and wipe it as often. If the
table does get lint or pet hair on it, an adhesive lint roller can be very effective at removing it. Even though I
don’t have any pets, my hairy arms sometimes shed onto the table, and the lint roller collects it all.

Balls
    It is a good idea to wipe the balls with a damp cloth whenever they seem dirty or after heavy use. During
play, especially after power shots, the balls can get marks on them. You should clean these any time you
have ball in hand or before racking for a new game.

     You should also clean all the balls any time they look dirty or have lost their shine. You can use a
commercially available ball cleaning machine, especially if you own a pool hall with lots of tables, but it is easy
enough to do by hand. It is best to use a cleaning product specifically formulated for pool balls, like Aramith
Ball Cleaner. If you do not use a proper cleaning product, playing performance will be affected. See the link
in the YouTube video description for more information and demonstrations.

     Be sure to shake the cleaner first. Then apply a drop or two to each ball. Then wipe and rub the entire
ball surface by applying pressure and rotating with both hands. Washing the towel and your hands when you
are done, gives the balls more time to dry completely. Before buffing, the balls will not be very shiny. Buff the
balls with a clean and dry cotton or micro-fiber cloth. As shown in Image 4, when you are done, the balls will
be very clean and shiny, ready for some top-notch play.

                                           Image 4 Balls after cleaning

    I hope you now have a better understanding and appreciation for billiard equipment care and hygiene. Be
sure to watch online video NV J.79 if you want to see demonstrations of everything.

     Good luck with your game from Dr. Dave!

                   NV J.79 – Pool Cue, Table, and Ball Care – How to Clean and Maintain
normal video

Billiards Digest                                                                                         June, 2021
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   June, 2021
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/european_open_push_shot_controversy.pdf
title: European Open Push Shot Controversy
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“European Open Push Shot Controversy”                                       ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at drdavepoolinfo.com. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     Did you hear about the push-shot-foul controversy during the recent European Open? If you did, do you
think the shot was a foul? There was a frenzy on social media, and I posted a video (NV L.118) to attempt to
dispel all the myths and misconceptions surrounding the debate. Quinten Pongers was faced with the situation
shown in Image 1, where the cue ball (CB) was frozen to the 6-ball. Pongers checked to make sure the balls
were frozen. Pongers is a true professional and knows the rules. That’s why he asked the ref to confirm the
balls were frozen before shooting. He would not have taken the shot he did if the balls were not frozen; because
if there were a small gap between the balls, his shot would certainly have been a double-hit foul.

                                              Image 1 The shot

    The table ref called a foul almost immediately after the hit, like he was expecting the shot to automatically
be a foul based on how Pongers was cueing. In fact, Pongers hit a very smart shot, attempting to hit the 9 with
the CB for a chance to pocket the 9 for an early win (which he almost did in the upper left corner).

     Image 2 shows the pertinent WPA rules concerning the matter. If the CB is touching or frozen to an object
ball (OB), and the balls are declared frozen, you are allowed to hit into the CB at any angle, provided you don’t
commit some other foul. It is important to note that in British-based cue sports like snooker and English pool,
you are not allowed to hit into a frozen CB. You must shoot away without moving the OB. And in snooker, you
are not even required to hit a rail since the initial OB contact counts as hitting a ball, even though it doesn’t
move. But this tournament was a pro pool event, not a snooker or English pool tournament. Although, some
people still might think Pongers’ hit was a push shot foul. In pool a push shot is where you prolong tip contact,
usually intentionally. Many examples can be found on the push shot resource page at drdavepoolinfo.com.

Billiards Digest                                     1                                                  June 2026
                                         Image 2 WPA rules on the matter

    To help provide more clarity, I included in NV L.118 similar shots with a side view in super-slow motion to
better show the action of the tip and balls. Image 3 shows a frame of video very soon after tip contact. The
CB separates from the tip immediately, just as with any other shot with a normal non-pushing stroke. There is
certainly no prolonged tip contact. The CB and OB move forward together naturally because the frozen balls
kind act as one solid object during the hit.

                   Image 3 Slow motion video showing no double hit or push after initial contact

     Now, as with any shot, it is possible to get a double hit or push with a frozen-ball shot, especially if you have
a large tip offset and exaggerate the stroke acceleration or follow through in an abnormal way. For example,
with one frozen-CB example in the video, I was able to prolong tip contact or get a double hit by unnaturally
exaggerating the stroke acceleration into the ball with topspin. Regardless, even this exaggerated shot could
not be called a foul live, without the benefit of super-slow-motion video replay. And even in super-slow motion,
the evidence for a push or double hit is not crystal clear (as shown in my video example). Pongers certainly
did not use an unusual stroke to prolong contact between the tip and CB. There was no reason to do so.

   One reason why the shot caused so much controversy was the commentary by Karl Boyes and Michael
McMullan, which was “unfortunate,” to say the least. He’s a sampling along with my commentary on their
commentary:

          Michael: “That is quite honestly the strangest thing I’ve ever seen on a pool table.”

Billiards Digest                                        2                                                   June 2026
I agree with Michael that this call was the strangest thing I have seen in a while, but Michael was unfortunately
referring to the shot and not the call. Here, Karl gives Pongers’ a little credit for knowing how to play pool:

          Karl: “Quinten Pongers can play the game. … Of course it was a push shot. What was he
          thinking?”

Apparently, Quinten also knows the rules a little better than Karl. Michael continued with his hyperbole:

          Michael: “That was the maddest thing I’ve ever seen in any cue sport.”

Again, I agree with Michael that the call and commentary is about the maddest thing I’ve ever seen and heard
from a pro ref and two experienced commentators. Obviously, their British cue-sport influences and
experiences had them confused, or they simply do not know the official rules of pool dealing with frozen-ball
shots and pushes. That most certainly would be mad. It at least makes me mad. Karl finally says something
I can agree with.

          Karl: “There must be some sort of rule I am unaware of.”

Michael now continues to demonstrate that he does not have a good understanding of non-British-pool frozen-
ball shots and push-shot fouls:

          Michael: “I just can’t find the words to sum up how astonishing that is. … Because not only are you
          saying rightly Karl that that was definitely a push shot … there was no possible way of playing that
          shot without it being a push.”

All I can agree with there is that it was astonishing! Karl and Michael both finally say things I can agree with:

          Karl: “In snooker, if it is a touching ball, you can play away, but that’s not the rule in 9-ball. … He
          obviously knows something we don’t.”

          Michael: “[We’re still in rack 1] and I think we can definitely say we’ll never forget this match.”

Then Karl went too far:

          Karl: “I think he needs to change his name to Quinten Bonkers.”

It is the ref and commentators who should instead feel embarrassed for not fully understanding the official rules
of pool. IMO, Pongers deserves an apology from both Karl and the ref. This from Michael is even more bonkers:

          Michael: “I’ve been working in cue sports for 30 years, and been watching them for nearly 40.
          Honestly, I’ve never seen anything quite as crazy as that. I really mean that.”

The following statement is also mostly rubbish:

          Karl: “When you have a situation like that, usually you see the players kind of raise the back arm up
          and play across the ball, not kind of right through the face of it, because even if you go right through
          the face of it, it is a push shot.”

Many people do wrongly think you are not allowed to hit straight into a frozen CB and must angle your cue up
or sideways at least 45° for the shot to be legal. One reason for this confusion is the unfortunate special rule
used at the Derby City Classic (DCC) for frozen-CB shots (see Image 4). Even American league systems did
away with the antiquated 45°rule many years ago. VNEA was one of the last hold-outs, but they got rid of the
rule in 2023, partially in response to a video I posted on the matter (see NV J.125). The arguments in that
video also apply to the DCC and anybody like Karl who thinks the way he does. I hope DCC also decides to
get rid of the “special” rule, just like VNEA did. DCC should instead use the WPA official rules of pool on this
matter, just like pretty much all other pro pool tournaments do.

Billiards Digest                                         3                                                   June 2026
                                    Image 4 Derby City Classic (DCC) “Rules”

    When Pongers questioned the call, Marcel Eckerdt (the Head Referee), was asked to come over to consider
an overrule of the Table Referee. I have been in contact with Marcel, and he explained to me that he felt it was
inappropriate for him to reverse the call. I know a reversal is something that should not be taken lightly, and it
should not be done unless there is clear evidence. Unfortunately, neither the table ref or Marcel had convenient
access to video replay, so Marcel had to make the call based on what the ref and Pongers told him. Marcel
decided he didn’t have enough information to change the ruling. He concluded that the table ref must have
seen something that would indicate to him that the CB was pushed by the tip.

    Pongers was very polite and respectful, knowing that at this point there was nothing else he could do. Even
when you disagree with a ref’s call, the call is final and you must accept that and move on. I was very impressed
with how calm and composed Pongers seemed right away. Many players who know the rules well would not
have been so calm. I certainly would not have been.

     Based on the WPA rule regulations, a foul should not be called unless there is clear direct or indirect
evidence of a foul. And any benefit of doubt goes to the shooter. Actual push shots can usually be seen very
clearly. But to call a push shot foul on a normal shot into a frozen CB, there needs to be very clear evidence of
a push. I am confident there was no such evidence with Pongers’ shot, especially since there was no access
to video replay or super-slow-motion video. In my opinion, after Marcel heard the whole story from both Pongers
and the table ref, he should have reversed the call, but I can also appreciate how one might be reluctant to do
so.

    Do you still think the shot was a foul? If so, please watch and listen to everything in online video NV L.118.
Personally, I have no doubt the call was bad. This type of shot is explicitly allowed in the rules, unless there is
some other foul, and there was certainly no clear evidence of a push or double hit.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV J.125 – Please Fix POOL LEAGUE RULES
   normal video
                   NV L.118 – Controversial European Open Push Shot Call – The Myths Busted

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at drdavepoolinfo.com.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                         4                                                   June 2026
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/everything_you_always_wanted_to_know_about_cue_ball_squirt_but_were_afraid_to_ask.pdf
title: Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Cue Ball Squirt, But Were Afraid to Ask
topics: collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Cue Ball
                Squirt, But Were Afraid to Ask
                                   © Ron Shepard, 2001
                                   Argonne Pool League
                                  Version Date: 01-Sep-01

        Definition: When the cue tip strikes a cue ball with a sideways offset, the ball
does not depart from the collision along a direction that is exactly parallel to the cue stick
axis. This off-angle cue ball deviation is called squirt. The term “squirt” first appeared in
Robert Byrne’s Advanced Technique in Pool and Billiards (Harvest, San Diego, 1990).
Squirt is sometimes called also “cue ball deflection” or “cue ball push.” There have been
many suggestions about why this occurs, what stroke and grip techniques affect squirt,
and how various equipment characteristics affect squirt. Many of these explanations are
incomplete, or have minor errors, or, in some cases, they are outright wrong in their basic
premises.

        Simple Explanation: Here is a simple physical explanation of squirt. As the tip
strikes the cue ball with sidespin, two things occur, the ball is set into linear motion, and
the ball acquires spin about its center of mass along the vertical axis. On a normal shot,
the cue tip does not slip on the ball, and the tip is in contact with the ball for only a very
short time (about 0.001 second). The spinning ball pushes itself away from the tip and
sets into sideways motion both the tip and the ball during this short contact period.
Conservation of momentum in the sideways direction means that as the ball moves to the
side in one direction, the tip must move to the side in the opposite direction. The speed at
which the ball and tip move to the side depends on the relative masses of the two objects.
If the ball is very heavy compared to the tip, then it will end up moving slowly to the side
and the tip will be pushed quickly to the side; if the ball is very light compared to the tip,
then the stick will be pushed very little, and the ball will push itself away quickly. The
squirt angle is determined by the ratio of the sideways speed to the forward speed of the
cue ball.

        Importance: Why is squirt important to the player? If there were no squirt, then
the player could use any amount of sidespin that he wanted, and he could aim his cue
stick along a line that is parallel to the direction that he wants the cue ball to move during
the shot. He would still be required to know how to pick the right angle to send the cue
ball in order to make the shot succeed, and he would still be required to adjust for the cue
ball swerve (the small amount of masse that is caused by stick elevation), but that would
be the whole story as far as aiming is concerned. In real life, there is also squirt, which
complicates things even more. With squirt, the player must also estimate how much

                                              1
deviation there will be away from the cue stick direction, and he must compensate for this
angle deviation. It does not matter if the player does this consciously, using a definite set
of steps, or unconsciously, by shooting in a way that just “looks” right, the player must
adjust for squirt. If the player does not adjust correctly, then the cue ball will not go in
the correct direction after leaving the tip, and after sliding and rolling on the cloth to the
object ball, it will not hit the object ball in the right spot in order for the shot to succeed.
         If all cue sticks have squirt, so that players must always adjust for it, what
difference does equipment make? The easiest way to understand this is to consider how
accurate a typical shot must be in order to succeed. When the object ball is close to a
pocket, then there is a relatively large line of contact spots that will result in a successful
shot. The spot that results in hitting the far right side of the pocket might be as far as
10mm away from the spot that results in hitting the far left side of the pocket, and hitting
any spot in between these extremes on the object ball will also result in shot success. But
when the object ball is far from the pocket, then it must be hit very precisely. When a
ball is near the center of the table, the spots on the object ball corresponding to the far-
right and far left sides of the pocket might be separated by only 1mm. The actual values
depend on the table size, the pocket size, the angle into the pockets (particularly for side
pockets), and the ball size (small snooker balls require an even more precise hit than the
larger pool balls) – the above numbers are examples of typical values.
         On the above center-table shot, if there were no squirt, then the player is required
to hit a target on the object ball that is about 1mm in size, that will require a certain
amount of aiming and stroke accuracy, and that required accuracy will be the same
regardless of whether he hits centerball or hits with sidespin. His target should be in the
middle of that range, and he is allowed 0.5mm error to one side and 0.5mm error to the
other side and the shot will still succeed. If the player has a very high-squirt cue stick
and he uses sidespin for this shot, he might be required to aim as much as 100mm to the
side of the object ball in order to hit near the desired target spot. The player must aim
between 99.5mm and 100.5mm to the side of the actual desired contact point on the
object ball in order for the shot to succeed. In other words, his estimation of the squirt
must be accurate to within 1% for the shot to succeed. However, if the player has a low-
squirt stick, then for this same shot he might be required to aim only 10mm to the side,
and the shot will succeed if the cue ball actually hits between 9.5mm and 10.5mm. With
the low-squirt cue, the player must judge the amount of squirt accurately to within 10% in
order for the shot to succeed. The 10% accuracy required with the low-squirt cue is
easier to achieve than the 1% accuracy required with the high-squirt cue. It is much
easier to judge small distances to a given accuracy than it is to judge large distances to a
given accuracy. As far as aiming adjustment due to squirt is concerned, less squirt is
better than more squirt.
         If common cue sticks are compared, the real range of squirt is probably more like
a factor of 4 or 5 from the high-squirt cues to the low-squirt cues, rather than a factor of

                                               2
10 as used in the above example, but the same general principle holds in any case. This
argument does not mean that one player with a low-squirt cue will be more accurate than
another player with a high-squirt cue – that would be comparing apples and oranges.
This argument says that a given player, no matter how good he is at estimating the effects
of squirt, will more consistently hit within the margin of error when using a low-squirt
cue than when using a high-squirt cue. The improved consistency will result for any
reduction in squirt, even smaller10% or 20% improvements are significant, not just the
factors of 4 or 5 that correspond to the extreme variations among common sticks.

        Detailed Physics: So, if less squirt is better, what needs to be done to get less
squirt. One obvious answer is to avoid using sidespin as much as possible, and if
sidespin is necessary for the shot, then use as little as possible so that the aiming
adjustments are minimized. But sometimes the player needs to use sidespin, so what
affects squirt? How does squirt change as the tip offset increases? Are there any stroke
mechanics that affect squirt? Is there more squirt for fast shots than for slow shots?
What about the type of bridge (open or closed) or the bridge length? What about tip
hardness, tip diameter, shaft taper, cue weight, and the cue balance point? How much
more do lighter snooker balls squirt than heavier pool balls or even heavier carom balls?
In order to attempt to answer some of these questions, we will examine the physics
involved when the tip strikes the ball with sidespin.

                                                                       Figure 1. The ini-
                                                                       tial stick angle and
                                                                       the resulting force
                                                                       direction        are
                                                                       shown schemat-
                                                                       ically from above.
                                                                       The squirt angle α
                                                                       is greatly exagger-
                                                                       ated in this dia-
                                                                       gram to show the
                                                                       angles clearly.

         Figure 1 is a view of the stick striking the cue ball from above, as if an overhead
video camera were looking straight down on the shot. The tip is striking the cue ball with
left sidespin. The squirt angle α is exaggerated in Figure 1 to make the drawing clear; as
will be seen below, actual squirt angles are much smaller. There is a net force on the cue
ball as the tip strikes the ball that is directed exactly along the x-axis as the figure is
drawn. This force starts off at zero, builds up to some maximum value, and then
decreases again to zero as the ball moves away from the tip. This force is applied to the

                                             3
contact point, and this contact point corresponds to a sideways displacement along the y
axis of length b=RSin(θ). This force does two things. At any moment in time t during
the tip-ball contact period ∆, it accelerates the ball along the x-axis according to the
equation
         F ( t ) = Mb V
                      ˙
                        b
and it accelerates the angular motion about the vertical axis according to the equation
         Iω̇ = r × F ( t)
In this equation, I = 25 Mb R 2 is the moment of inertia of the ball, and
r = −RCos(θ ) ˆi + RSin (θ ) ˆj is the vector from the center of mass of the ball to the tip-ball
contact point. R is the ball radius, Mb is the ball mass, and it is assumed that the ball is
constructed from a material with a uniform density. The total linear momentum that the
ball attains during the tip-ball contact time is given by the equation
          ∫ ∆ F (t)dt = M V = M V ˆi
          0                  b b     b bx
The total spin that the ball attains during this time is given by

                (                           )
                                            ∆
        Iω = −RCos(θ ) ˆi + RSin (θ ) ˆj × ∫ F ( t) dt
                                                0

                         (                      )
              = RMbVbx −Cos(θ ) ˆi + Sin (θ ) ˆj × ˆi

              = −RMbVbx Sin (θ )kˆ
              = ω kˆz
Using the relative tip offset (b/R), the spin is related to the ball speed according to
                    b
          Rω = − 25  Vbx k̂
                     R
It is seen from this last equation that the spin on the cue ball depends linearly on the
relative tip offset (b/R), it does not depend on the ball mass Mb, and that it is proportional
to the cue ball speed Vbx. It is convenient to write the “spin” vector as Rω because this
magnitude is the instantaneous speed of a point on the rotational equator of the ball as the
ball spins about the vertical axis. The sign of ωz is consistent with the right-hand-rule for
vector cross products. A positive tip offset (b>0) results in a clockwise ball rotation (as
viewed from above), which in turn means that the spin vector points down, and the spin
vector component is negative (ωz<0). This is the situation shown in Figure 1. It should
also be mentioned that tip offsets are limited approximately to the range –1⁄2≤(b/R)≤1⁄2.
Tip offsets outside this range are likely to miscue, or if the offset is large enough, the tip
would miss the ball entirely; in these cases, the above equations obviously would not
apply.
         It is somewhat remarkable that the details of the time-dependent force F(t) do not
matter in this relation between the spin and speed of the cue ball. Presumably, a hard tip
would have a shorter contact time ∆ than a soft tip, but the magnitude of the force during

                                                    4
this shorter contact time is larger, such that the above time integral, which is called the
impulse, ends up being the same; this impulse appears in both the equation for the linear
velocity and the equation for the angular spin. This also rules out the idea that special
stroke techniques (e.g. a tight wrist, or a loose wrist, or a wrist snap) can affect the
spin/speed ratio. Such stroke techniques might affect the overall speed, or they might
help or hurt other aspects of the shot, such as speed control and consistency, but they
must affect both the spin and the speed equally in such a way that the ratio remains
constant for a given tip offset.
        The tip of the stick is in contact with the ball during the short contact time ∆, and
whatever sideways velocity is attained by that point on the ball is also attained by the cue
tip during that time. The instantaneous velocity of the contact point on the ball, relative
to the ball center of mass, is given by
                    ( 2                ) (
        ω × r = − 5 (b / R)V kˆ × −Cos(θ ) ˆi + Sin (θ ) ˆj
                                  bx                          )
               = 25 (b / R) Vbx ˆi + 25 (b / R)Vbx 1 − (b / R) ˆj
                           2                                  2

Notice that the velocity component along the x-axis is always positive, but the velocity
component along the y-axis depends on whether the tip strikes with a positive tip offset
(left sidespin, as shown in Figure 1) or with a negative tip offset (right sidespin). The
total velocity of the tip contact point is the vector sum of the above tangential rotational
velocity and the ball center of mass linear velocity.
         Vcp = Vb + ω × r

                (                 )
              = 1 + 25 (b / R) Vbx ˆi + 25 (b / R)Vbx 1 − (b / R) ˆj
                              2                                  2

              = Vcpx ˆi + Vcpy ˆj
The total momentum of the cue stick and the ball together is conserved during the
collision, so the initial momentum, which was aligned along the x′-axis as shown in
Figure 1, must be the same as the final momentum, which includes both the stick and the
ball motions. In particular, the initial momentum before the collision in the y′-axis is
zero, so the final momentum along this axis must also be zero. The equation that results
from this momentum conservation is
                    ′ , y + MbVby
        0 = M tipVtip           ′
The parameter Mtip is not the total stick mass. Rather, it is the inertial resistance to
sideways motion that the tip possesses. This effective mass Mtip is sometimes called the
endmass. The relation between the unit vectors in the (x,y) coordinate system and the
(x′,y′) coordinate system depends on the squirt angle α according to
         ˆi = Cos(α ) ˆi ′ − Sin (α ) ˆj′
        ˆj = Sin (α ) ˆi ′ + Cos(α ) ˆj′

                                                    5
Using this transformation, the ball velocity and the tip/contact-point velocity may be
rewritten in the (x′,y′) coordinate axis as
        Vtip = Vcp

                        (                             )            (             )
             = Vcpx Cos(α ) ˆi ′ − Sin (α ) ˆj′ + Vcpy Sin (α ) ˆi ′ + Cos(α ) ˆj′

               (                                          ) (
             = Vcpx Cos(α ) + Vcpy Sin (α ) ˆi ′ + Vcpy Cos(α ) − Vcpx Sin (α ) ˆj′  )
          Vb = Vbx Cos(α ) ˆi ′ − Vbx Sin (α ) ˆj′
Substitution into the conservation of momentum equation gives the general equation for
the squirt angle.
                                (
              0 = M tip Vcpy Cos(α ) − Vcpx Sin (α ) − MbVbx Sin (α )  )
                       Sin (α )
        Tan (α ) =
                       Cos(α )
                            M tipVcpy
                   =
                       MbVbx + M tipVcpx
                            5 (b / R)   1 − (b / R)
                                                      2
                   =        2
                            (            )
                       1 + Mb / M tip + 25 (b / R)
                                                           2

It is clear from the last expression that the individual endmass and ball mass values are
not important, but rather it is only the ball mass to endmass ratio that matters. In the
limit (Mb/Mtip)→∞, then Tan(α)→0 regardless of the tip offset. That is, there is no squirt,
for any tip offset, in the limit of very heavy balls and/or very light endmass. The other
limit, (Mb/Mtip)→0, is also interesting. In this limit of heavy endmass and/or a very light
ball, squirt remains a smooth function of the tip offset.
Table I. Squirt Angles†
        (Mb/Mtip)         Tan(α)                  α                      Stick Pivot Point
           ∞                 0                      0°                       ∞
         200              .0043                   0.25°                    97.66″
         100              .0086                   0.49°                    49.11″
          75              .011                    0.65°                    36.98″
          50              .017                    0.97°                    24.85″
          40              .021                    1.20°                    20.00″
          30              .028                    1.59°                    15.14″
          20              .041                    2.33°                    10.28″
          10              .077                    4.38°                     5.43″
            0             .643                    32.7°                     0.57″
†
  Squirt angles are shown as a function of the (Mb/Mtip) mass ratio. All values are
calculated for (b/R)=3⁄8, and the equivalent stick pivot points are calculated for pool balls
with R=9⁄8″.

                                                               6
        Table I shows the squirt angle α for a (b/R)=3⁄8 tip offset (comfortably within the
miscue limit) for a variety of (Mb/Mtip) mass ratios. As will be discussed below, pool cues
have (Mb/Mtip) ratios that range from 20 (high squirt) to 100 (low squirt).
        Figure 2 shows the squirt angle as a function of tip offset (b/R) for (Mb/Mtip) mass
ratios of 20, 30, 50, and 100, which span the typical range of real cue sticks. Although
the entire possible range from 0 to 1 is plotted for (b/R), the only realistic values are in
the |b/R|≤1⁄2 range due to the miscue limit. It may be seen that the squirt angle is almost a
linear function of the tip offset in this practical range for all of the plotted mass ratios; it
is only for larger tip offsets that the nonlinearity becomes dominant.

                -2
           6.0 10

                                                    (M /M )=20
                -2                                    b           tip
           5.0 10
                                                                                        Figure 2. The
                                                                                        squirt angle
                -2
           4.0 10
                                                                                        Tan(α) is shown
                                                                                        as a function of
 Tan(α )

                                                (M /M )=30
                                                     b           tip
                                                                                        tip offset (b/R)
                -2
                                                                                        for several se-
           3.0 10
                                                                                        lected (Mb/Mtip)
                                                                                        mass ratios.
                -2
           2.0 10
                                                    (M /M )=50
                                                         b        tip

                -2
           1.0 10                                    (M /M )=100
                                                             b         tip

                    0
           0.0 10
                        0   0.25          0.5                                0.75   1
                                                (b/R)

        The above discussion results in a relatively simple expression for the squirt angle
α, but there are two hidden complications. One is that the squirt depends on the offset of
the total force direction b rather than the actual tip offset b′ (as observed by the shooter).
The relation between these two offsets is
         b
            = Sin (θ )
         R
         b′
            = Sin (θ + α ) = Sin (θ )Cos(α ) + Cos(θ ) Sin (α )
         R
Because (θ+α)<90° in Figure 1, it is clear that b≤b′. For the small squirt angles that
occur with real pool cues (see Figure 1), b≈b′, so this minor detail is insignificant for

                                                7
practical purposes. This small difference between the observed tip offset b′ and the
smaller effective tip offset b means also that low-squirt cues result in slightly more
sidespin, and cue ball speed, than high-squirt cues (all other things being equal). Another
way of looking at this is that the high-squirt cue loses more energy during the stick-ball
collision by moving the cue stick and cue ball to the side than does a low-squirt cue.
However, this spin increase is a very minor effect, probably too small for all but perhaps
the most expert players to notice without special equipment or measuring devices.
         The other hidden complication is the somewhat uncertain nature of the effective
tip mass Mtip. In the above discussion Mtip plays the role of inertial resistance to a
sideways force applied to the tip. Consider two extremes. One extreme is when
essentially all of the cue mass is located right at the tip; in this case the effective tip mass
will be the same as the stick mass. At the other extreme, consider a very long cue with
all of the mass concentrated in the butt far from the tip; in this case, the effective tip mass
will be very small and it would be easy for the ball to push the tip to the side with very
little force. Actual cue sticks are somewhere in between these two extremes.

        Rigid Cue Approximation: Some simplifying approximations are useful to find
an estimate for Mtip: 1) the cue stick will be considered to be a rigid body, and 2) the
interaction between the cue stick and the bridge hand and grip hand during the short tip-
ball contact time will be neglected. Real cues are not rigid; in fact, the sideways
vibrations can be felt, and sometimes even seen, when a cue ball is struck with sidespin.
The neglect of the grip hand is sometimes called the “loose skin” approximation. The
general idea is that the tip is in contact with the ball for such a short time, and for such a
short distance, that the soft skin and flesh in the hand do not have time to tighten
sufficiently in order to apply any additional forces to the stick that may then be
transmitted to the ball. However, this assumption will allow the general effects on squirt
of the stick length L, the balance point B, and the moment of inertia Is to be estimated.
        When the sideways force acts on the ball during the tip-ball contact time, a
sideways force in the opposite direction and with the same magnitude is applied to the
tip. The sideways impulse of the ball is opposite to the sideways impulse of the stick.
This sideways force accelerates the stick center of mass to the speed
                     ∆
             ′ = ∫ Fy′ ( t) dt
        M s Vsy
                     0
The tip acquires also an angular velocity ωs about the stick center of mass B (measured
from the butt of the stick)
                           ∆
        I sω s = ( L − B) ∫ Fy′ ( t) dt
                           0
              = ( L − B) M sVsy
                              ′
It is convenient to write the moment of inertia of the stick as
         Is = ks2Ms

                                               8
The distance ks determined from ks2=(Is/Ms) is called the radius of gyration. If all the
mass of the stick were located at this distance from the balance point, then the balance
point and moment of inertia would remain unchanged. Because of physical constraints,
0≤B≤L, 0≤ks≤L, and 0≤Is≤MsL2.
       The instantaneous tip velocity due to the rotation about the stick center of mass is
                        (L − B) 2 M sVsy′
        (L − B)ω s =
                                 Is
                        (L − B) 2Vsy′
                    =
                              ks2
This rotational velocity component increases when the balance point is farther away from
the tip (i.e. as (L–B) increases), a trend that agrees with intuition and the general idea of
moving mass from the tip end of the cue to the butt end.
         The total sideways tip speed is the sum of the center of mass speed and the
rotational speed at the moment after the collision
                     ′ + ( L − B)ω s
           ′ , y = Vsy
         Vtip
                                                                         ′ , y = M sVsy
The effective endmass parameter Mtip is defined from the relation M tipVtip           ′ .
     ′ is the actual impulse of the stick, and M tipVtip
M sVsy                                                ′ , y is what the equivalent impulse
would have been if a point mass of Mtip had been located at the tip. This equivalence
results in the relations
          M s Vtip ′ ,y
               =
         M tip    Vsy′

                          (L − B) 2Vsy′
                    ′ +
                  Vsy
                                 ks2
              =
                             ′
                           Vsy

              = 1+
                   ( L − B)
                            2

                           ks2
It is clear from this equation that (Ms/Mtip)≥1 for all possible values of the balance point
B, the cue length L, and the radius of gyration ks. The following limits and bounds also
hold for the balance point
           lim  M s 
                          =1
          B → L  M tip 

            lim  M s             2
                          = 1+ L ≥ 2
          B → 0  M tip       ks2
and for the radius of gyration

                                              9
           lim  M s 
                           = 1+ (
                                   L − B)
                                          2
                                           ≤2
        ks → L  M tip            L2
           lim  M s 
                         =∞
         ks → 0  M tip 
The (Ms/Mtip) ratio should be as large as possible to minimize squirt, so the rigid cue
model suggests that the stick moment of inertia Is, or equivalently the radius of gyration
ks, should be minimized, and that the balance point B , which is less important to the
value of the mass ratio limit, should be as far towards the butt end as practical. A pool
ball weighs 6 oz, and a typical pool cue weighs 18 to 20 oz, so the ratio (Mb/Mtip)=
(Mb/Ms)(Ms/Mtip), which determines squirt, will be about three times smaller than the
above (Ms/Mtip) ratio.

         Squirt Measurements: It is possible to determine by experiment what is the
effective tip mass for a given cue stick. One approach would be to pick a tip offset,
measure the squirt angle α, and then determine the corresponding endmass from the
above equations. It is difficult to obtain consistent results with this straightforward
experiment for several reasons. First, the actual tip offset is not easy to see from the
perspective of the shooter. The shooter can see the shaft offset, but the actual tip offset
depends on both the shaft offset and the tip curvature. For a given shaft offset, a flatter
tip will have a smaller actual tip offset than a more rounded tip. Secondly, the actual
squirt angle as the ball leaves the tip is not easy to see because the cue ball moves too
quickly. Instead, the offset of the cue ball direction from the stick angle can be measured
at some distance away, for example by noting where the cue ball hits a distant cushion; a
longer distance would seem to give more precise measurements of the actual squirt angle,
but the problem is that longer distances allow also the cue ball to swerve, the masse effect
due to the slightly elevated cue butt on almost all shots, and the measured result is
thereby contaminated by this other effect. And finally, there are the small errors
introduced in the stick angle because of imperfect stroke technique. Each of these
problems can be addressed with the use of special equipment, such as jigs and high-speed
video equipment.
         An alternative experiment to determine the squirt characteristics of a cue stick is
the “aim and pivot” approach proposed by Bob Jewett [Billiards Digest, June, 1997]. An
object ball is placed about 12 inches (about one diamond on a 9ft table) from the cue ball.
The precise distance is not important, but it should not be too large because of the
potential for swerve contamination. The shooter lines up the shot for a centerball hit for
an exactly straight-on shot. The shooter picks a trial “pivot point” a given distance away
from the cue ball, and uses that distance for the bridge length. The shooter then pivots
the butt of the cue about this pivot point, moving the tip to achieve a sideways tip offset

                                             10
of about (b/R)=3⁄8, and then the shooter strokes the cue stick along this new line. A firm
level stroke should be used, enough to send the object ball at least two table lengths, in
order to minimize the swerve contamination. If the trial pivot point is too close to the cue
ball, then the stick angle change induced by the pivot will be larger than the squirt angle;
in this case the cue ball will not hit the object ball straight on, it will instead hit on the
same side as the tip offset. If the trial pivot point is too far from the cue ball, then the
stick angle change induced by the pivot will be smaller than the squirt angle; in this case
the cue ball will not hit the object ball straight on, it will instead hit on the opposite side
as the tip offset. By adjusting the trial pivot point forward and backward appropriately, a
pivot point can be found for which the induced stick angle is exactly the same as the
squirt angle; in this case the cue ball will hit the object ball straight on, and the cue ball
will sit spinning in place. This special pivot location is called the stick pivot point. All
three of these possible situations are shown in Figure 3. The only purpose of the object
ball in this procedure is to provide a sensitive measure of where the cue ball hits: left,
right, or straight on. A selection of stick pivot points is given in Table I along with the
corresponding (Mb/Mtip) ratios.

Figure 3. The aim-and-pivot approach is shown schematically for three different trial
pivot points. The trial pivot point is too short in the left diagram, too long in the right
diagram, and is at the correct distance in the center diagram.

                                              11
        A high-squirt cue might have a pivot point of 10 inches (Mb/Mtip≈20), an average
cue will have a pivot point in the 16 to 18 inch range (Mb/Mtip≈30), a good cue will have a
pivot point around 30 inches (close to the joint on a two-piece cue, Mb/Mtip≈50), and a
low-squirt cue will have a pivot point of 40 inches or longer (Mb/Mtip≈100). It is difficult
to stroke accurately with bridge lengths exceeding ~18 inches, and the above pivot
procedure must be modified in order to allow for a reasonable bridge length in these
cases. As a practical matter, it is recommended also to use a mixture of both left and
right offsets when executing the shots to determine the pivot point; this tends to eliminate
the bias due to imperfect, but consistent, swoops in the player’s stroke.
        The advantage of the pivot point method for determining the squirt characteristic
of a cue stick, compared to an attempted direct measurement based on the squirt angle,
may be seen by examining the dependence of the measured pivot point on the tip offset.
Consider the center diagram in Figure 3. The correct stick pivot point has been found for
a particular tip offset b such that the stick angle α′ is exactly the same as the
corresponding squirt angle α. The stick angle after the pivot is given by

        Tan (α ′) =
                              (b / R)
                    (D / R) + 1 − 1 − (b / R) 2
in which D is the pivot point distance as shown in Figure 3. If the correct pivot point has
been found, then the stick angle α′ is equal to the squirt angle α for this offset. This
results in the relation
                         Tan (α ′) = Tan (α )

                                               2(
                                               5 b / R)    1 − (b / R)
                                                                         2
                      (b / R)           =
        (D / R) + 1 − 1 − (b / R)   2
                                               (            )
                                            1 + Mb / M tip + 25 (b / R)
                                                                             2

This equation can be solved for (D/R) as a function of the mass ratio and the tip offset.
                  (             )
         D  2 Mb / M tip + 7 − 5 1 − (b / R)
                                               2
         =
         R           5 1 − (b / R) 2
                  ( (
                 2 1 + Mb / M tip   )) + (7 + 2( Mb / Mtip )) (b / R)2 + O (b / R)4
             ≈
                        5                    10
                                                                                 (    )
It may be verified that (D/R) is a slowly varying function of the tip offset (b/R) in the
practical range 0≤(b/R)≤1⁄2. It is only as (b/R) approaches 1 that the measured stick pivot
point would begin to change significantly. For example, for a (Mb/Mtip) ratio of 40, the
stick pivot point for an offset of (b/R)=1⁄4 has the value of D=19.0″, the offset of (b/R)=3⁄8
has the value of D=20.0″, and for the maximum practical tip offset of (b/R)=1⁄2, the pivot
point has the value of D=21.5″. Even the (b/R)→0 limit results in D=82″/5=16.4″, which
is still only a modest change in the pivot point distance. Therefore, the stick pivot point
is, to a reasonable approximation, essentially independent of the tip offset in the range

                                                      12
1
 ⁄4<(b/R)<1⁄2, greatly reducing the effects of an imperfect stroke on the squirt
measurement. Because the stroke errors are reduced, due to the design of the experiment,
the aim-and-pivot method is a reliable way to measure and to specify the amount of squirt
for a given stick. Due to the way the (Mb/Mtip) ratio appears in the numerator of the (D/R)
expression, the variation of the pivot point with tip offset is somewhat less for a low-
squirt cue than for a high-squirt cue.
        Notice that for a given mass ratio and relative tip offset, the stick pivot point D
depends on the ball radius. This is because the “natural unit” for the pivot point is in
terms of the ball radius or ball diameter. If all other things were equal, a given stick
would have a shorter stick pivot point D for smaller snooker balls, and it will have a
longer stick pivot point for larger carom balls. Of course, all other things aren’t equal in
this case, and, in particular, the ball mass Mb increases with the ball radius, and this also
tends to make the stick pivot point D shorter for lighter snooker balls and longer for
heavier carom balls.
        The amount of squirt changes with the tip offset, so how does the stick pivot point
end up being (almost) independent of the tip offset? It is because of a cancellation of
errors. When pivoted about the correct pivot point distance, a given stick angle results in
a particular tip offset, and that tip offset results in an amount of squirt that compensates
almost exactly for the stick angle; the result is that the cue ball goes in the intended
direction after being struck by the tip. If the stick angle is increased by a small amount,
then the tip offset increases by a small amount, and that increased tip offset results in an
increased squirt angle; the result is that the increased squirt angle compensates for the
increased stick angle, and the cue ball still goes in the intended direction after being
struck by the tip.
        In addition to using the aim-and-pivot shot as a way to measure the squirt inherent
in a given cue stick, it may also be used by the player to aim shots with sidespin. In this
context, this technique is sometimes called “backhand English.” The player aligns the
shot as if he were going to shoot with no sidespin. He then pivots about the bridge hand,
by moving his back hand holding the butt of the cue, in order to align the cue stick along
a new angle, and strokes along this new angle to execute the shot. If his bridge length is
close to the stick pivot point, then the cue ball will go along the correct line after being
struck with the tip. Backhand English is sometimes taught to beginners when they first
begin to learn how to use sidespin. Unfortunately, this beginner instruction usually does
not include an explanation of squirt, so the student is left with an incomplete knowledge
of why the technique works, and, perhaps more importantly, why it fails for some cue
sticks but appears to work well with other cue sticks. Indeed, a low-squirt cue will have a
pivot point near the rear grip hand, and the appropriate “fronthand English” technique in
this case is to pivot with the rear hand held fixed by sliding the bridge hand to the side,
rather than holding the bridge fixed and moving the rear hand.

                                             13
        Rigid Cone Model: It is instructive to consider the pool cue to be shaped like a
cone and constructed of wood with a constant density throughout. This model allows the
balance point and moment of inertia to be estimated and predicted squirt can be compared
to actual squirt measurements. Although the butt and part of the cue shaft are usually
conically shaped, the end of the shaft near the tip is shaped like a cylinder, with constant
diameter. Different types of woods are usually spliced together to form the butt, and
these different types of woods have various densities, usually with the heavier woods in
the butt and the lighter woods in the shaft. Even one-piece cues are usually constructed
with heavy wood spliced in the butt. Some cue makers are designing shafts that are
purposely lighter near the tip end than usual; the Predator shaft, for example, is drilled to
form a hollow tube for a few inches near the tip in order to reduce the endmass. There
are materials other than wood that are used in the tip, ferrule, joint, and in various places
in the butt, and these materials all have various densities. Having pointed out all of these
shortcomings, we now proceed to characterize this rigid cone cue model.
        Consider the butt end of the cue stick to have a radius R1, and the tip end of the
cue to have a, presumably smaller, radius of βR1, and a total length L. The radius of the
conical cue stick at a given distance z along the length is
                     R (β − 1)
         R( z) = R1 + 1        z
                         L
The total mass of such a cue is
                                        2 π L R( z )
        M s = ∫ ρ(r ) dV = ρ ∫ ∫
                  V                                  ∫ r dr dz dθ = 13 πρLR12 (1 + β + β 2 )
                                         0 0         0
Cylindrical coordinates are convenient for the evaluation of the volume integrals. The
center of mass (i.e. the balance point) B measured from the butt end is

        B=
           ρ 2π L
                  R( z )
              ∫ ∫ ∫ rz dr dz dθ =
                                  1 + 2β + 3β 2
                                                L
                                                     (                       )
           M 0 0 0                4 1+ β + β 2           (                  )
The moment of inertia about this balance point around the vertical axis is
                                                             2 π L R( z )
                      (
        I s = ∫ ρ y + ( z − B) dV = ρ ∫ ∫
              V
                          2              2
                                             )                0 0
                                                                     ∫ (r 3Sin 2θ + r(z − B)2 ) dr dz dθ
                                                                     0

          =
            (3 (1 + β ) + 4 β 2
                              4
                                        ) M L + 3(1 + β + β + β + β ) M R
                                                     2
                                                                             2   3       4
                                                                                               2

                  (
             80 1 + β + β          )
                                  2 2
                                                 s
                                                                      (
                                                                  20 1 + β + β   2
                                                                                     )       s 1

Pool, billiard, and snooker cues have length 55″≤L≤60″, have a diameter at the butt
R1≈1.25″, and a tip diameter of about 0.5″, which corresponds to β=2⁄5. Consequently, the
second term in the above expression for Is is much smaller than the first term, and in the
remainder of this discussion it will be ignored. The balance point of a 58″ conical β=2⁄5
cue would be about 21 inches from the end of the butt. Actual pool cues have a balance

                                                                    14
point 15 to 19 inches from the butt. This gives an idea of the accuracy of the conical
model and also the kind of deviations to expect when compared to actual cue sticks.
        These expressions for the balance point and moment of inertia may be used to
predict (Ms/Mtip) ratios.
                 (           2     3
        M s 8 6 + 9β + 10β + 4 β + β
              =
                                     4
                                            )                   (rigid cone approximation)
        M tip
                       (
                  3 (1 + β ) + 4 β 2
                            4
                                       )
The endmass is a small fraction of the stick mass for this rigid cone model. It is useful to
consider a couple of examples to see exactly what is the range of values. If the stick were
a cylinder with constant radius, corresponding to β=1, then the rigid cone model would
predict (Ms/Mtip)=4 and if the tip goes all the way down to a point, corresponding toβ=0,
then (Ms/Mtip)=16. The typical pool cue value of β=2⁄5 results in an intermediate value of
(Ms/Mtip)=6.83 for a rigid cone. Although a rigid cone is a coarse approximation of an
actual cue stick, this simple model gives an idea of what might be expected for the
endmass and how that mass might depend on the cue stick weight, the stick balance
point, and the tip diameter. A pool ball weighs 6 oz, and a typical pool cue weighs 18 to
20 oz, suggesting a maximum value of (Mb/Mtip)≈5. As discussed above, even this
maximum estimate is a factor of 4 to 20 too small compared to actual pool cues. As
already mentioned, the balance point is different for the conical cue model than for actual
pool cues, and this accounts for some of this discrepancy, but this alone is not sufficient
to account for a factor of 4, much less a factor of 20. However, the general trends
predicted for the rigid cone model regarding the endmass are expected to be valid, despite
the lack of quantitative agreement with actual pool cues.
        The major discrepancies between these predictions and the actual observations are
probably due to failure of the rigid cue approximation. Indeed, if the mass in the cue is
far enough away from the tip, it would be irrelevant to the cue ball because the speed of
sound in the stick limits the amount of information that can be reflected back from the
butt end of the stick during the short contact time. The balance point and moment of
inertia are static quantities, and do not depend on the dynamics of the tip-ball collision or
on the internal vibrations of the stick during this short collision time. This implies that
there should be some kind of, as yet uncharacterized, relationship between the effective
endmass and the mass distribution as a function of the distance from the tip other than
that predicted by the rigid cue approximation. At present, the endmass is best considered
simply an empirical quantity that characterizes a given cue stick. In contrast, the loose
skin approximation appears to be valid, or at least it is not inconsistent with the observed
discrepancies between the measured squirt and the predicted squirt based on the rigid
cone approximation.

                                             15
       Other Squirt Experiments: In addition to numerous stick pivot point
measurements that have been reported by several people, a few other squirt experiments
have been performed that should be mentioned. All of these have been reported and
discussed in the newsgroup rec.sport.billiard.

• Bob Jewett has reported the squirt results from gluing a cue tip onto a solid metal rod;
       he observed large squirt for this “cue.”
• Mike Page has reported the results of clamping a small lead weight onto the ferrule of a
       cue; large squirt was observed, and the amount of squirt decreased as the weight
       was moved farther from the tip until the weight was about 8″ away at which
       distance the normal amount of squirt was observed.
• Jim Buss has inserted a brass rod into the end of a normal pool cue shaft and then
       attached a normal ferrule and tip in the normal way; a large amount of squirt was
       observed with this cue.
• The author has reported the squirt results of using a normal pool cue along with a very
       light Styrofoam ball (found in hobby and craft shops); a large amount of squirt
       was observed in this experiment.
• The Predator web site contains the reports of several experiments. A jig (called Iron
       Willie) is used to eliminate stroke imperfections and to allow for precise shot
       repetition. The cue ball squirt angle is measured as a function of shaft offset for a
       variety of cue shafts including a very light one made of synthetic composite
       materials. Also, some data is presented that suggests a dependence on the tip
       curvature.

        Desirability: Is squirt ever desirable? If a player has a physical handicap that
prevents him from stroking straight, then it might be advantageous for that player to use a
cue that has a pivot point near his bridge length. If the player has the ability to line up
correctly for the shot in the first place, then such a cue stick will tend to compensate for
his unusually large stroke errors. For such a player, the stroke errors are larger than the
judgment errors required to compensate for squirt, and he might be better off eliminating
the large errors and accepting the smaller judgment errors.
        Another possible exception is when a player uses a separate cue for the break shot
for open-break games such as 9-ball or 8-ball. In this case, the player wants to hit the cue
ball with no sidespin, his stroke involves more body movement and upper arm movement
than the usual stroke, his bridge length and stroke distance are longer than usual, and his
arm applies more force than usual during the forward stroke. All these things contribute
to larger than normal errors in the placement of the tip on the ball and in stick alignment.
The sideways errors in tip placement are equivalent to a pivot about the bridge (see
Figure 3). With a low squirt cue (with the bridge length shorter than the stick pivot

                                             16
point), any unintentional pivot results in a different cue ball direction and eventually in an
off-center hit on the head ball. If the stick pivot point is at the bridge length however,
then the unintentional sidespin is accompanied by squirt that compensates for the change
in the stick angle, and the cue ball goes along the original intended target direction. The
cue ball does have sidespin on it, so some energy is lost in the break shot due to this
unwanted rotation, but the cue ball will still hit the head ball straight on as intended. In
other words, a high-squirt cue does not solve all the problems associated with imperfect
technique on the break shot, but it addresses the most important problem, hitting the head
ball straight. Most players bridge longer on their break shots than for other normal shots,
so the pivot point of the break cue should be at the appropriate distance for the individual
player. With such a break cue, the player should take extra care when setting up initially
for the break shot in order to take full advantage of the compensating squirt
characteristics of the stick.

       Summary: With the detailed discussion given above for squirt, several of the
questions posed in the beginning can be answered.

• How can squirt be minimized? By reducing the tip offset or by using a cue stick with a
       small endmass.
• Does shaft flexibility affect squirt? No, not directly. Shaft flexibility may affect the
       endmass and thereby affect squirt indirectly, but this is probably a relatively
       minor effect. This means that the player is able to choose a cue with a desired
       amount of shaft flexibility for other reasons, without having to compromise the
       squirt characteristics.
• Does tip curvature affect squirt? No, not according to the above analysis, except for the
       fact that the tip curvature affects the actual tip offset for a given shaft offset.
       However, there are data at the Predator web site that suggests that a rounder tip
       (i.e. a dime radius compared to the larger nickel radius) reduces squirt.
• Does squirt depend on shot speed? No, not directly. Shot speed might affect the
       endmass, but this is probably a relatively minor effect. The observation that
       different aiming is required for different shot speeds, particularly on longer shots,
       is probably due to cue ball swerve, not to squirt.
• Does squirt depend on the cue stick weight? Yes, but only when it affects the endmass.
       Weight added more than about 10″ away from the tip apparently has little effect.
       This means that the player is free to choose stick weight for other reasons without
       compromising squirt characteristics.
• Does squirt depend on the stick balance point? Yes, according to the rigid cone
       approximation, but only because it has a small effect on the endmass.
• Do ivory or brass ferrules have more squirt than synthetic materials? If so, it is
       primarily because of the density of the material and the resulting effect on the

                                             17
         endmass. It appears unlikely that the hardness or other physical characteristics
         affect directly the squirt. However, a thick brass ferrule will probably have more
         squirt than a thin brass ferrule. Also, some ferrules are attached to the shaft with a
         metal screw or stud; these cues probably have larger squirt than an otherwise
         equivalent cue with a standard wood tenon.
• Does the tip diameter affect squirt? Yes, because smaller tips will have smaller
         endmass, all other things being equal. This trend is predicted by the rigid cone
         model. However, there are other ways to reduce endmass than by using a small
         tip diameter, such as the approach used by the Predator design.
• Does tip hardness affect squirt? No, not according to the above analysis. This also
         suggests that the tip-ball contact time, which is related to tip hardness, does not
         directly affect squirt, but this has not been proven independently, and it is possible
         that contact time does play at least a minor role in determining the effective
         endmass through speed-of-sound mechanisms. To the extent that tip hardness is
         independent of squirt, this means that the player is free to choose tip hardness
         based on personal preference without compromising the squirt characteristics.
• Is squirt caused by the tip slipping on the ball? No, squirt occurs even when the tip
         does not slip. The tip does not slip on normal shots.
• Are there any stroke techniques that can be used to minimize squirt? No, not unless the
         technique somehow reduces the tip offset, in which case the same shot could have
         been achieved simply by stroking normally and using the smaller tip offset in the
         first place.
• Is it better to use an open bridge than a closed bridge? It is possible that a tight closed
         bridge might increase the effective endmass, and thereby increase squirt, but this
         is probably a very minor effect.
• For a given cue stick, will snooker balls squirt more than pool balls, and will carom
         balls squirt less? There are two separate effects, mass and ball diameter. Due to
         the ball/tip mass ratio, the lighter snooker balls will tend to squirt more than pool
         balls, and the heavier carom balls will tend to squirt less. Futhermore, the stick
         pivot point depends on the ball radius, so, for a given relative tip offset and
         ball/tip mass ratio, the larger balls will tend to have longer stick pivot points.
• If I use a low-squirt cue, must I suffer from excessive or sensitive sidespin? All other
         things being equal, high-squirt cues will appear to get slightly less spin (and
         speed) than a low-squirt cue for a given tip offset, but this is a very minor effect,
         smaller, for example, than the differences in tip curvature between two tips might
         affect the amount of sidespin.
• Does the amount of shaft bend, buckle, or vibration affect squirt? No, the shaft is set
         into motion as the tip strikes the ball, but the actual bending and/or buckling
         occurs after the short tip-ball contact time. If the ball has already separated from

                                              18
       the tip before the bending occurs, then the bending and buckling can have no
       effect on the ball.
• Must I trust the advertising of the cue makers to tell me how much squirt a stick will
       have? No, the aim-and-pivot squirt test is a reliable way to determine squirt, it
       requires no special equipment, and with a little practice, it can be performed by
       anyone with a reasonably straight stroke.
• What is the optimal squirt characteristics for a break cue? The stick pivot point should
       be at the bridge length. For most players, this will be typically in the 14″ to 16″
       range.

        With these answers in mind, there are still many details that are not understood at
present regarding squirt. A more detailed understanding of endmass appears to be the
most important. How exactly does the mass distribution along the shaft contribute to the
observed effective endmass? And even if a complete and correct understanding of
endmass and squirt were known, there would be still the subjective challenge of choosing
a cue stick with the optimal amount of squirt for each player.

        Postscript: This document is a first step at collecting together information and
ideas related to squirt, it is not the final answer to this interesting and practically
important topic. This document will evolve in the future in order to report and describe
new developments, new explanations, and new squirt data. Comments and corrections
should be sent to the author at email://shepard@tcg.anl.gov.

                                            19
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/everything_you_need_to_know_about_throw.pdf
title: Everything You Need To Know About Throw
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Everything You Need to Know About Throw”                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    I recently posted an online video (NV J.42) that demonstrates the top 10 most important things you need
to know about throw, which are summarized below. Throw refers to offline motion of the object ball (OB)
caused by friction between the cue ball (CB) and OB during a hit. As shown in Image 1, when throw is due
primarily to cut angle, it is called cut-induced throw (CIT); and when it is primarily due to sidespin, it is called
spin-induced throw (SIT).

                      Image 1 Cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT)

1. No Throw with Gearing Outside Spin

     As shown in Image 2, with a cut to the left and left spin, the OB gets thrown to the right. And with lots of
right spin, the OB gets thrown to the left. Therefore, there is an amount of spin that will result in no throw
whatsoever. It is called gearing outside spin since the CB rolls along the OB while in contact, like a
meshing gear. In NV J.42, notice how the vertical 11-ball stripe remains vertical with gearing outside spin.
Anytime there is throw, sidespin is transferred to the OB, which causes the vertical stripe to wobble, as is
clearly visible in the video.

    You might be thinking: “Should I use gearing outside spin on every shot so the OB will always head in the
direction I expect?” Well, it is not that simple. First, sometimes position play requires you to use other types
and amounts of sidespin. Also, you need to be able to judge the gearing amount of spin, which is different for
every cut angle. Also, when using sidespin, you must be good at adjusting your aim for CB deflection caused
by squirt and swerve, which can be difficult to judge over a wide range of shot speeds and distances.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     November, 2020
                      Image 2 Using a Mirror to Check Aim, Alignment, and Stroke

2. Throw Can Often be Ignored

    On most shots, you can ignore throw, especially on short shots on tables with big pockets. But on a
longer shot or with tighter pockets, throw can cause a miss, especially if the shot calls for slow stun, where
throw is maximum, which is discussed more later.

3. Aim Thinner to Account for CIT

     One option to compensate for throw is to simply aim to overcut the shot slightly. As mentioned above,
another option is to use gearing outside spin. You can also use faster speed and backspin that both reduce
throw. Then only a small correction for throw is required. You can also use faster-speed and topspin, where
there will be very little throw. Image 3 shows a good example where you need slow stun to get shape on the
8 after shooting the last stripe. As demonstrated in NV J.42, with a pure ghost-ball aim, you would miss the
11 due to CIT. But you can pocket the ball and win the game if you aim to over-cut the 11 slightly. This will
shift the tangent-line forward a little, so you also need a touch of backspin to keep the CB on-line.

                                     Image 3 Adjusting aim for throw

Billiards Digest                                                                                November, 2020
4. Shots with the Most Throw

    As mentioned above, one type of shot where you must compensate for throw is a soft stun shot. Another
type of shot where you must compensate is a slow roll shot. The amount of throw will not be as much as with
a soft stun shot, but it can still cause a miss. Another shot where you absolutely need to adjust for throw is if
you are using an amount of spin much greater than the gearing amount. All these shot types are
demonstrated in the video, along with various approaches for dealing with them.

5. Frozen and Small-Gap Combos

    Another type of shot that requires understanding of and correction for throw is frozen or small-gap
combinations. One reason is: the 1st OB is guaranteed to be sliding with stun into the 2nd since it does not
have time or distance to start rolling. Remember, throw is maximum with a stun shot. In Image 4, the 11 and
13 are frozen. If you hit the 11 along the line of centers, the 13 will head straight. But if you send the 11 to
the right, it will throw the 13 to the right (as shown in the image). And if you send the 11 to the left, it will
throw the 13 to the left.

                                   Image 4 Small-gap combination throw

    With a very small gap, the 13 still goes in the throw direction even though the 11 will cut the 13 when hit
at an angle. And when the gap is large, the cut effect dominates and the 13 goes in the cut direction.
However, as demonstrated in the video, when the gap size is exactly 3/8”, the throw cancels the cut over a
wide range of angles. So, with a 3/8” gap, regardless of the angle or direction the 11 is driven into the 13, the
13 still goes straight! This is one of the most amazing physics principles of pool! I did not just make up this
number. It comes from a thorough physics and math analysis (see TP B.21), and it also works at the table.

    The video also shows several frozen-ball examples where understanding throw is very important. Be
sure to check those out online.

6. Maximum Throw

   It is important to know the maximum throw you can get. Under typical conditions, maximum throw is
generally about 1 inch per foot of OB travel, or ½ a ball per diamond on a 9′ table. See the video for
demonstrations.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   November, 2020
7. Maximum CIT

    As we have seen, CIT is largest with slow-speed stun. At faster speed, the ball surfaces do not engage
as well, resulting in less friction and throw. Throw also changes with cut angle. Obviously, there is no throw
with a straight shot with no sidespin. For small cut angles (for example, a ¾-ball hit), there is only a small
amount of throw. With a thin cut (for example, a ¼-ball hit), there is again less than maximum throw, but
more than with a full hit. CIT is maximum close to a ½-ball hit. See the video for demonstrations and
examples of how to apply this information.

8. Maximum SIT

    To get maximum SIT with a straight shot, use slow-speed stun with about ½ of maximum sidespin. With
less spin, you get less throw. With maximum spin, you might think you would get maximum throw, but you
would be wrong. Again, when the relative speed between the ball surfaces gets faster, the surfaces do not
engage as easily, resulting in less friction and throw. You get even less throw with maximum spin and fast
speed.

    You can get SIT even with very large cut angles, but lots of sidespin is required. As demonstrated in the
video, even with a cut angle close to 90˚; you can hit the ball a touch fuller and throw the it in with maximum
sidespin. Some people might think such a shot is impossible, but they would be wrong.

9. Follow and Draw Reduce Throw

     Throw is smaller with follow and draw shots. With full topspin or bottom spin, the amount of throw is
about one fourth of the throw expected with a stun shot at the same speed. The reason for this is the friction
force is not pointing sideways (in the throw direction) as with a stun shot. Instead, it is pointed up or down
slightly, so there is less force available in the horizontal direction. Although, some draw shots can have more
throw than one might expect. With slow speed or large distance, the backspin wears off on the way to the OB
and the CB slows down due to drag, and this can even lead to soft stun which will produce maximum throw.

10. Cling/Skid/Kick

     Since throw depends on friction between the ball surfaces, throw can vary with the condition of the
surfaces at the contact point. As demonstrated in the video, if you put some saliva at the contact point, there
is almost no friction or throw (see Image 5). If the ball surfaces are dry, smooth, and clean, you get the
expected amount of throw, which can be large with the stun shot used in the video. If there happens to be a
chalk mark on the CB or OB at the point of contact, you get much more throw than expected. This is called
cling, skid, or kick. Wipe chalk marks off the CB every chance you get (before each break and with ball in
hand), and keep the OBs as clean as possible, to limit how often cling might occur. Sometimes cling is out of
our control, but by keeping everything clean, we can reduce its frequency.

Billiards Digest                                                                                 November, 2020
                                        Image 5 Ball surface condition effects

     I hope the information in this article gives you an improved understanding of important throw effects. And
I also hope this understanding will help you miss fewer shots and enable to make shots you before never
thought possible. Everything described is demonstrated in online video NV J.42. Be sure to watch the videos
and try everything out at the table. Reading is good, and watching is better, but trying is best. If you want
more information or want help with learning how to adjust your aim for throw and CB deflection caused by
squirt and swerve when using sidespin, see my System for Aiming With Sidespin (SAWS) available at
DrDaveBilliards.com. It covers everything in detail and provides many game-situation examples.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.42 – Top 10 Things You Need to Know about THROW
normal video

                    TP B.21 – Small-gap-combination throw effects
technical proof

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    November, 2020
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/eye_pattern_best_practices.pdf
title: Eye Pattern Best Practices
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
Eye Pattern “Best Practices”                                                 ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at drdavepoolinfo.com. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    When hitting a pool shot, what are your eyes focused on during the final forward stroke? Do you focus on
the cue ball (CB) last, or the object ball (OB) last? A recent video on this topic, with Jayson Shaw explaining
his eye pattern, was widely circulated on social media. I decided it was important to help put Jayson’s video in
perspective, hence this article, which summarizes important points from online video NV L.81 dealing with eye
pattern “best practices.”

                           Image 1 Controversial Jayson Shaw eye pattern video

    Unlike most players, Jayson focusses on the CB during his final stroke. He states: “What’s the point in
looking at the OB?” Well, my video and the remainder of this article answer this question. He also stated in
the video: “I think a lot of people actually look at the OB as their last ball.” That is most certainly correct,
especially with many other top players.

    Since Jayson is one of the most accurate shooters in the world, hence his nickname “Eagle Eye,” many
people took notice of the video and thought they should start doing what he does. Well, before you do this,
please consider everything below.

   Here’s a summary of eye pattern “best practices” recommended by most top instructors and followed by
most top players:

          1. Focus at the OB while getting down into your stance (see Image 2a) and look at the CB as the tip
             gets close.

          2. Look back and forth between the CB and OB with the cue still to carefully verify tip position and the
             cue’s alignment with the desired line of aim.

          3. Look at the CB during any warm-up strokes. Or alternatively, look at the CB during forward strokes
             and the OB during backstrokes.

          4. Stop at the CB and do one more tip and cue alignment check, again with the cue still.

Billiards Digest                                       1                                                  July 2025
          5. Lock your focus on the OB before the final stroke (see Image 2b). Or, alternatively, if you have a
             long pause at the end of your backstroke, lock the focus during the pause.

          6. Keep your focus along the shot line during and after the final stroke, resisting the urge to turn your
             head or get up to see where the OB is going.

                     a) OB focus during the drop                b) OB focus during the final stroke

                                       Image 2 Eye pattern “best practices”

    So how can Jayson be so accurate if he is not using the recommended eye pattern “best practices?” Well,
once you are lined up properly, it is not actually critical what you focus on as long as your focus is locked, keep
your head and body still during the stroke, and use “best practices” stroke mechanics. You could even close
your eyes before the final stroke (ala Michael Jordan showing off shooting blind free throws) and still get good
results; although, nobody in their right mind would do such a thing in an important pool match.

    With enough practice over many dedicated years of consistent repetition, you can learn to master any
technique (like Jayson has). However, there are slight advantages to OB focus for most people, as described
below. BTW, if you want to improve your stroke mechanics, so you can have the desired stillness, accuracy,
and consistency with fewer years of dedicated practice, see the stroke “best practices” resource page at
drdavepoolinfo.com.

     To help show that many players focus on the OB last, I decided to look at players who made it to the final
rounds in the recent European Open, which included many of the world’s top pros. Videos of these matches
(or highlights) are available on YouTube. With some of the players, it was difficult to tell where their focus was
with the camera views available. Although, the eyebrows are often a dead giveaway, even when the eye’s
aren’t clearly visible. In Image 3a, Szewczyk’s has OB focus. In the video, his eyebrows obviously shift from
the CB to the OB before the final forward stroke. Josh Filler is currently the best player in the world, and he
clearly has OB focus (with raised eyebrows) during his final stroke (see Image 3b). Shane VanBoening, one
of the greatest players of all time and America’s current best, definitely follows eye pattern “best practices.” He
has intense locked focus on the OB before and during the entire final stroke (see Image 3c).

Billiards Digest                                       2                                                   July 2025
             a) Szewczyk                              b) Filler                        c) VanBoening

                                           Image 3 Top Pro OB Focus

    Of the nine players in the matches available on YouTube who made it to the final rounds of the European
Open, six of the nine players had clear OB focus, and only one (Jayson Shaw) had clear CB focus. For the
other two players, the focus was not clear in the video footage available. It is no surprise that Filler and
VanBoening, two of the current best players who went deep in the tournament, exhibit what is widely considered
eye pattern “best practices.”

     Below are the reasons why most top players in all cue sports focus on the OB just before and during the
final stroke. Again, OB focus does not offer a large advantage, but it is recommended:

          1. The distant focus helps you maintain the desired aim since you can clearly see what is called the
             aiming “shot picture.”

          2. The distant focus helps you deliver the cue more straight toward your target. This is also the case
             in other sports like with free throws in basketball (with focus on the rim), bowling (with focus on the
             arrows down the lane), baseball pitching (with focus on the target over the plate), horseshoes (with
             focus on the stake), and darts (with focus on the target). In all these examples, the final focused
             gaze is at the distant target. This helps maintain straight aim and helps ensure straighter implement
             delivery in the target direction. Although, one must be careful with sports analogies since pool is
             unique in many ways. For more information, see the last section of the eye pattern “best practices”
             resource page at drdavepoolinfo.com, which discusses racquet sports, batting sports, and golf
             as poor eye pattern analogies to pool.

          3. Focus on the OB helps ensure you keep your head and body still during and after the stroke,
             instead of looking up from CB focus to see where the CB is heading.

          4. With OB focus, you can better diagnose and learn from each shot since you can immediately and
             more clearly see the direction the CB heads and where it hits the OB, without needing to move your
             eyes or head during the shot.

     One exception to focusing on the OB last is with long, highly-elevated-cue shots, the topic of a recent video
I did covering this important technique (see NV L.79). With these shots, CB focus during the final stroke is
often more effective for most players since even a tiny trace of unintentional sidespin can cause a miss.

   Snooker arguably requires some of the best shot-making of any cue sport. Neil Robertson, in a guest
appearance on Stephen Hendry’s YouTube Channel (see Image 5), offered some interesting perspectives and

Billiards Digest                                        3                                                  July 2025
useful tips. Both Hendry and Robertson are considered among the best to have ever played the sport, and
even they don’t totally agree on which eye pattern is best.

                         Image 5 Snooker greats Stephen Hendry and Neil Robertson

   Be sure to check out online video NV L.81 if you want to learn more and see demonstrations of everything
above. And if you still need convincing that focusing on the OB during the stroke offers slight advantages,
check out the entire eye pattern “best practices” resource page at drdavepoolinfo.com.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV L.81 – EYE PATTERN “Best Practices” … Cue Ball or Object Ball Focus Last?
   normal video
                   NV L.79 – How to Be More Accurate With Jacked-Up or Elevated-Cue Shots

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at drdavepoolinfo.com.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                         4                                                   July 2025
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/fast_speed_banks.pdf
title: Fast Speed Banks
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Fast Speed Banks”                                                        ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles can be viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference
numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or
inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD.
Details can be found online at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

    There are many different “systems” commonly used to help aim kick and bank shots. If you want to learn
about them and see video demonstrations, visit the “bank and kick shot aiming system” resource page in the
FAQ section of my website. A good summary of the basics along with some commonly-used systems can be
found in NV B.81. Regardless of what system you might use, or even if you just aim by “feel,” you need to be
able to make adjustments for different speeds, distances, and cut angles. See my February ’13 article and
NV C.14 for more information.

     Have you ever wondered why great bankers frequently hit the balls hard? There is a reason ... actually
there are several reasons. For details, see the “banks and kicks – advantages of fast speed” resource page
in the FAQ section of my website. The main benefit of faster speed is that the rebound angle is less sensitive
to speed changes, making the angle more predictable. The downside is that the effective size of the pocket is
smaller at faster speed (see Bob Jewett’s May ’13 and June ‘13 articles and the “pocket size and center”
resource page in the FAQ section of my website for more info), but rebound-angle consistency is a more
important factor in successful banking. Most great bankers don’t really use “systems” to aim their shots.
Instead, they rely on the “feel” they’ve developed through years and years of practice and successful
experience. But we mere mortals can certainly benefit from a little “systems” help. If nothing else, a system
can at least give you a useful reference from which to adjust.

     Diagram 1 illustrates one useful system for aiming fast-speed banks from Disc IV of the Video
Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS). I call it the “1/3-more-than-twice the distance” system. The diagram
shows several reference tracks that illustrates how the system works. The aim points for the reference lines
are measured in the rail grooves across from diamond locations. The “rail groove” is where the base of a ball
sits when it is frozen to the cushion. It is sometimes visible on a worn table. With each reference line, the
point at which the line of aim crosses the near rail is 1/3 of a diamond above the 2x distance point predicted
by a true mirror aim. The system can be summarized concisely as: (2x + 1/3) to x. For example, to bank the
                                                                                                             th
object ball (OB) shown, it needs to be sent along the reference line from a 1/3 of a diamond above the 4
                  nd
diamond to the 2 diamond since 4 is twice 2.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      July, 2013
                        Diagram 1 “(2x + 1/3) to x” across-from-diamond system

     Diagram 2 shows an alternative system proposed by Ralph Eckert. It can be concisely summarized as
the “2x to 3/4x” through-diamond system. The diagram shows several reference tracks that illustrates how
the system works. The aim points for the reference lines are measured in the lines through the diamonds
(instead of across from the diamonds in the rail grooves as above). With each reference line, the point at
which the line of aim crosses the banking-rail diamond line is 3/4 of (1/4 less than) 1/2 of the diamond point
on the near rail. For example, to bank the OB shown, it needs to be sent along the reference line from 5 to
3/4 of 2.5 since 2.5 is half of 5. Therefore, the distance the aim is shifted below the 2.5 point is 1/4 of 2.5
which is 1/4*5/2 or 5/8. The math is a little more complicated for this system, but if you memorize the
reference lines, you don’t need to do the math. A video demonstration of how the system works at the table
can be found in the “banks and kicks - fast-speed mirror-system adjustment” resource page in the FAQ
section of my website. If you compare the reference tracks of the two systems (see Diagrams 1 and 2), and
visualize shots between these tracks, you will see that both systems predict a very similar line of aim for
banks of all angles. You just need to decide which system you think is easier for you to apply at the table.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      July, 2013
                             Diagram 2 “2x to 3/4x” through-diamond system

     In game situations, the OB won’t always be sitting conveniently on one of the banking system references
lines (as shown in Diagrams 1 and 2), and the cue ball (CB) won’t always be lined up with the necessary line
of aim for the bank. You can still use the systems in these cases, but they require a little more work and
adjustment. Diagram 3 shows an example of how to apply the “(2x + 1/3) to x” system. First, decide which
reference tracks the OB is closest to. The two nearest tracks for this example are (3 + 1/3)-to-1.5 and
(4+1/3)-to-2. If the OB is close to a reference track, you can just make a small adjustment relative to that
track. If it is in between two tracks, you just need to visualize a line through the OB between the reference
tracks. If you want to be more precise, you can check the numbers where your chosen line of aim crosses
the rail-groove points to see if they satisfy the system. If they don’t, you can make a small correction. Here,
the required line of aim goes from (3.5 + 1/3) to 1.75, which satisfies the system since 3.5 is twice 1.75. An
alternative way to determine the required OB line is to ignore the reference tracks and just take a guess at the
line of aim (especially if your bank intuition is good) and then check the numbers and make a slight
adjustment if necessary. Regardless of how you determine the ideal line of aim for the OB, you still need to
make adjustments based on the CB location. If there is a cut angle, you either need to make an aiming
correction for cut-induced spin, which changes the OB rebound angle (see NV C.14 for more information and
demonstrations) or you need to use gearing outside english to prevent cut-induced spin (see the “gearing
outside english” resource page in the FAQ section of my website for more info and demonstrations).

Billiards Digest                                                                                       July, 2013
                                Diagram 3 “(2x + 1/3) to x” system example

    Diagram 4 shows an example of how to apply the ““2x to 3/4x”” system. Again, first decide which
reference tracks the OB is closest to. The two nearest tracks for this example are 4-to-3/4(2) or 4-to-1.5, and
5-to-3/4(2.5) or 5-to-1-and-7/8. Here, the required line of aim is in between the two reference tracks and goes
from 4.5 to 3/4(2.25), which is 4.5 to (2.25 – 1/4(2.25)), which is 4 to (2.25 – 9/16). This satisfies the system,
since 2.25 is half 4.5. Again, you don’t need to do all of this complicated math if you memorize the reference
tracks and just visualize in between them.

                                  Diagram 4 “2x to 3/4x” system example

Billiards Digest                                                                                         July, 2013
     When using either of the systems described above, just smack the ball just like the top bankers. The ball
will usually go to the hole, provided you’ve also compensated for any cut angle and English effects (see NV
C.14). Yes, banking ain’t easy ... and it takes lots of practice. But the systems offered here should help limit
the guesswork and speed your learning process if you’re not a top banker already. Give them both a try and
decide which you like better. The downside of “2x to 3/4x” system is that the math is too tricky forcing one to
memorize the reference tracks. The advantage is that the aiming is through the lines of the diamonds which
many people prefer to the across-diamond rail-groove measurements. I personally prefer the “(2x + 1/3) to x”
system because I don’t need to memorize or calculate weird numbers, and it’s easy for me to visualize a 1/3
of a diamond.

                      NV B.81 – Bank and kick shot terminology and basics, from VEPS IV
normal video
                      NV C.14 – Bank shot cut-angle-effects drills, from VEPP IV

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards,”
and co-author of the DVD Series: “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS)” and “Video
Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).”

Billiards Digest                                                                                         July, 2013
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/faster_than_a_speeding_bullet.pdf
title: by DR. GEORGE ONODA Faster Than
topics: cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
by DR. GEORGE ONODA

                          Faster Than
                       A Speeding Bullet?
        How fast does the cue ball really travel on a typical break shot?
"HE'S GOING TO knock this ball in at           made when the cue hits the cue ball and           Balukas propelled the ball at 22 MPH.
100 miles per h o u r . . . , " whispered an   when the cue ball hits the rack. With a           Ewa Mataya, Belinda Bearden and Loree
ESPN announcer during a televised 9-ball       special oscilloscope, which plots the             Jon Jones typically had speeds between
match.                                         sound intensity versus time, the time of          18 and 21 MPH. From this small sampl-
   No, the announcer wasn't Joe Isuzu.         travel (from one sound impulse to the             ing, the women's speed were on the
But, the inference that the cue ball can       next) could be accurately measured. It            average around 20 MPH, which is about
travel 100 MPH made me curious. Just           was found that this sound method and the          83 percent of the average for the men.
how fast does a professional pool player       frame counting method gave the same                 The three or four MPH variations in
propel the cue ball on a 9-ball break          results.                                          break shot speeds within players of the
shot?                                             These methods measure the average              same sex might account in part for why
   I asked some of my pool playing             speed of the cue ball. Because the cue ball       some players have better break shots than
friends, and their guesses ranged from         actually slows down gradually, the initial        others. But the tapes reveal that success,
speeds of 50 to 150 miles per hour. Since      speed is slightly higher and the final speed      where a ball is made, was not strongly
I had never seen this actual speed             is slightly lower than the average speed.         correlated with speed. Accuracy was
reported, I set off lo make such               But since the speed only diminishes by a          equally important, which meant hitting
measurements.                                  few percent, the average speed serves ade-        the one ball in the right place and with
   Video tapes are a rich resource of top      quately as a measure of the cue ball speed        the proper English. Often in successful
professional players in action. With           in a break shot.                                  break shots, the cue ball was observed to
modern technology, it is now possible to          1 analyzed video tapes of some of the          move about less after hitting the rack than
analyze these tapes in great detail, using     matches in the 1986 Resorts International         with the unsuccessful shots, indicating
slow motion and frame-by-frame stop ac-        tournament, and the 1987 Brunswick                that more of its energy has been transfer-
tion. The time between each frame is one-      9-Ball Team Challenge. (Players involv-           red to the object balls.
thirtieth seconds.                             ed in the tapes included Mike Sigel, Jim             In any event, the surprising truth is now
    The average speed of a ball between        Rempe, Allen Hopkins, Steve Mizerak,              revealed. The top speed that a profes-
two points can be measured from a video        Nick Varner and Jose Garcia.) The speed           sional propels a cue ball is around 26
tape by knowing the distance traveled and      of break shots ranged from 22 to 26 MPH,          miles per hour. Sorry to say that it is not
measuring the time taken to travel this        the average being 24 MPH. The top speed           100 miles per hour, which is the top speed
distance. Since the dimensions of a table      of 26 MPH was recorded for several break          for throwing a baseball. While this may
are fairly standardized, the distance bet-     shots by Mike Sigel. At this speed, the cue       damage egos, take comfort in the fact
ween the starting cue ball position and the    ball reached the one ball in 0.12 seconds.        that the cue ball weighs twice that of a
 loot spot where the one ball lies can be         The speeds of break shots in several           baseball.
easily determined. For example, if the cue     women professionals were also measured,           Dr. George Onoda is a research scientist al
ball is placed on the head string, one dia-    using a tape of the Brunswick Team                IBM's Research Division, as well as an avid
mond to the right of the head spot, the        Challenge. In one break shot Jean                 pool and billiard player.
distance to the foot spot is typically 53
inches.
   The time of travel is obtained from the
number of video frames taken from
beginning to end. The position of the cue
ball in each frame is marked as a dot
directly on the video screen. The result is
a series of dots along the path. The spac-
ing of the dots in the middle of (he path
are measured. From this we can deter-
mine the total number of frames from the
beginning to the end. The time from start
to finish is equal to the number of frames
times one-thirtieth second. Dividing this
into the total distance gives the average
speed of the ball in inches per second.
This is converted to miles per hour. The
measurements are accurate to around plus
or minus one-quarter miles per hour.
   To be certain that the frame counting
method gives the right answer, spot
checks were made using an entirely dif-
ferent technique. Here I used the sounds       The truth is finally out: Break shots by pros like Danny DiLiberto (above), travel around 25 MPH.

34
                                         Perfect Draw?
                                       Test your draw shot against the best.
                                                by DR. GEORGE Y. ONODA

    STROKING THE BALL as low as                tion of the final track remains the same    direction, the final track of the cue ball
    possible is like sliding a coin to the     irrespective of speed (see Fig. 2). The     stroked with perfect draw and a
    edge of a table. The best and the worst    speed of the cloth also shifts the track    horizontal cue will be perpendicular to
    differ by a gnat's eyelash. In pool, you   but does not change its direction. This     the forward direction. In our setup, the
    either get a great draw or you miscue.     method works well with soft and             object ball goes off at 39 degrees if
    Few players chance cutting it too close.   medium strokes. If the ball is hit too      sunk in the corner pocket. Since the
    But the closer you approach the brink,     hard, it will strike the long rail while    cue ball is aimed parallel to the short
    the better is the quality of your draw     it is still curving, and the final direc-   rail, its final track ends up parallel to
    shot.                                      tion is not achieved.                       the long rail when a perfect draw shot
       How low do you strike the cue ball?        This method is based on theory (the      is achieved.
    This cannot be determined from the         physics of pool). Let us suppose for           Thanks to friends at the Jack and
    usual draw test, where you measure         sake of argument that the lowest a cue      Jill Cue Lounge (Brewster, N.Y.), this
    how far a ball is drawn back in a head-    ball can be struck safely is around two-    method has been tested with players of
    on shot with an object ball. The draw      fifths the distance from the ball's         varying abilities. The best players could
    distance depends not only on how low       center to the table surface. For the pre-   sometimes, but not always, bring the
    you hit the ball, but also on the force    sent, we will call this the perfect draw.   ball parallel to the long direction. Less-
    you apply and on the speed of the          Theory predicts that when the object        skilled players had inclined tracks
    cloth. To reveal how low the cue ball      ball is cut 39 degrees from the forward     where the cue ball hit the long rail
    is being struck, I have developed
    a method that you can easily
    carry out on a pool table.
       The setup for the method is
    illustrated in Fig. 1 (a regulation
    pool table is assumed). An ob-
    ject ball is placed 4% inches from
    the foot spot in the direction of
    the foot rail. Applying draw to
    the cue ball, the object ball is
    shot into the upper-right corner
    pocket. The cue ball is placed
    where the aiming direction is
    across the table, parallel to the
    foot rail. The cue ball must be
    as close as possible to the object
    ball, without interfering with the
    stroke, so that the least amount
    of back spin is lost when the ob-
    ject ball is reached.
       When the cue ball caroms off
    the object ball (Fig. 1), it initial-
    ly travels along the tangent line
    (a line perpendicular to the
    direction that the object ball
    travels). Then the back spin
    curves the ball to the left, toward
    the head rail. After curving, the
    ball rolls along a straight path,
    or track.
       The direction of this final
    track determines the quality of
    the draw. The closer this direc-
    tion is to being parallel to the
    long rail, the lower the cue ball
    has been hit below center dur-
    ing the stroke. Altering the speed
    of the shot causes the length of
    the curve to change and the final
    track to shift. However, if the
    cue ball is struck the same
    distance below center, the direc-

1 4 Billiards Digest • May/June 1989
before reaching the head rail. In-
terestingly, one player with an excep-
tional stroke seemed to be able to ex-
ceed the parallel limit by a few degrees.
This might mean that the ball was
struck lower than what we assumed for
perfect draw. However, there is a little
slop in our test, because the width of
the pocket is more than twice the
diameter of the ball. It is possible to
cheat the pocket by about two degrees,
which could explain how the parallel
limit was exceeded slightly.
   With this method, it is possible to
test the truth about several assertions.
One is that the cue ball can be hit
significantly below the two-fifths
point. If the ball could be struck half
the distance from the center to the bot-
tom, then the final track would exceed
the "parallel limit" by around 12
degrees. This would be a shift sideways
of almost one diamond for a forward
travel of four diamonds, which would
be very noticeable. There is also the
question as to whether a partially in-
clined cue aids in increasing draw. In
our setup, the cue must be inclined
(slightly elevated) by at least five
degrees because of the interference of
the rail. If this causes an increase in
the amount of draw compared with a
horizontal cue, then increasing it even
more (e.g. 20 degrees) should have a
pronounced effect and cause the track
course to exceed the parallel limit
significantly. (A masse shot with a
near-vertical cue is another matter,
which we do not include in this
discussion.)
    So the question is, can the parallel
 limit of the track be exceeded
 significantly by any means other than
 a strong masse shot? Is it possible to
 cause the track to point toward the
 bottom-left corner in Fig. 1, for exam-
 ple? If any reader can achieve this
 seemingly superhuman draw, let me
 know, as it will give us new insights on
 the physics of draw. Please be remind-
 ed that the test is valid only if: 1. The
 balls are in the right position; 2. Your
 aim is parallel to the short rail; and 3.
 The object ball is sunk in the corner
 pocket. It is helpful to have someone
 watch to be certain that you are aim-
 ing parallel to the short rail as you
 shoot.
Dr. George Onoda is a research scientist at
IBM's Research Division, as well as an avid
pool and billiard player.

                                              Billiards Digest • May/June 1989 1 5
                                                      by Dr. George Onoda

                                   Know These
                                  Winning Caroms
                       Win with a dead carom off a spotted object ball.

   CONSIDER THE SITUATION in                     accepted to be 34 degrees. It is also      control over the alignment. But if you
   Diagram 1 from a 9-ball game. Your            easy to roll a cue ball; you only need     have cue ball in hand, you can set up
   opponent made the 5 ball, but has             to stroke it softly above center. And      whatever alignment you wish (assum-
   scratched. The 5 is on the foot spot          the aim does not have to be perfect,       ing no interfering balls). In other
   and you have ball-in-hand. The 9 ball         since a small error does not change the    words, in Diagram 1, there is a place
   is sitting in the jaws of the far, corner     deflection angle significantly.            (e.g. Point R) where the cue ball will
   pocket. You cannot shoot the 5 into              The above knowledge is of little        be properly aligned with the 5 and 9
   the 9. Nor can you make the 5 ball in         value unless the cue ball and two ob-      balls for the easy carom. The only pro-
   a pocket to start a run. Your best hope       ject balls are precisely aligned for the   blem is knowing where to place the cue
   is either to play a safety or to carom        34-degree deflection angle. In most        ball.
   the cue ball off the 5 and into the 9         game situations, you have little or no        Diagrams 2, 3 and 4 show how to
   for an immediate win.
       Many players will pass up the carom
   shot because the opponent may run
   the table if it is missed. It is easy to
   play an effective safety instead, giving
   you a chance to run the table or knock
   the 9 in on your next turn. But you
   might not be so lucky; your opponent
   may play a great kick shot, leaving you
   with nothing.
       You probably would not hesitate
   playing the carom immediately if it
   were a high-percentage shot. How
   would you play the carom? Would
   you put the cue ball at point N and hit
   the 5 ball very thin? This is a delicate
   shot, with little margin for error in
    aiming the ball; you would be doing
   well making this shot 50 percent of the
   time. Would you instead put the cue
    ball near point P and carom with draw
    or stun action? This is an even more
    difficult carom to execute reliably, for
    the path depends on three variables
    (the angle of the cue, the amount of
    back spin, and the speed).
       So, if the caroms from N and P are
    not reliable enough for this situation,
    is there a better carom shot? Definite-
    ly! In fact, there is a carom that you
    can make better than 90 percent of the
    time. It involves a half-ball hit on the
    5 ball, with soft, rolling action, both
    of which are easy to execute. But you
    have to know how to set it up.
       First, why a rolling, half-ball hit? As
    discussed in several of Robert Byrne's
    articles, a soft, rolling, half-ball shot
    gives a deflection angle for the cue ball
     that is accurate, reliable and resistant
     to error. This deflection angle is now

20 Billiards Digest • December 1989
   set up the proper alignment for caroms       point, "A," lies on the opposite long      on the opposite long rail, in the direc-
   leading to different pockets on the          rail, 1 inch past the second diamond.      tion toward the foot rail.
   table. These are for pockets on one          The other critical point, "B," is on the       To reach a far corner pocket,
   side of the table. For those on the          head rail, one-half diamond from the       Diagram 4, one critical point, "E,"
   other side, imagine looking at the           center diamond. This shot from Point       lies 1 inch from the first diamond on
   diagrams in a mirror. Now each               B is essentially the shot de-              the foot rail. The second point, " F , "
   pocket in the three diagrams can be          scribed on page 112 of Byrne's Stan-       lies on the opposite long rail, halfway
   reached in two ways, from one side or        dard Book of Pool & Billiards. When        from the first diamond and the cor-
   the other of the object ball. Critical       this book was originally published, the    ner pocket.
   points along the rails are identified.       standard 9-ball scratch rule was that          These critical points are not hard to
   Once an appropriate critical point is        the cue ball was in hand behind the        remember, since they are either 1 inch
   known, a critical line is drawn from         head string. Now, with the more            from a diamond, or are halfway bet-
   it to the edge of the object ball. The       popular ball-in-hand anywhere on the       ween two diamonds. Their locations
   cue ball is then placed anywhere along       table rule, dead caroms to all pockets     should be checked for your table, as
   this critical line, the spotted ball is      become possible.                           variations can occur with different
   struck with a soft, rolling, half-ball hit      To reach a side pocket, as in           tables. The necessary adjustments can
   on the appropriate side of the object        Diagram 3, one critical point, " C , "     be determined quickly by trial and
   ball, and the cue ball follows the           lies 1 inch from the center diamond on     error.
   carom line to the 9 ball.                    the foot rail, in a direction away from        I know that some readers may
      To reach a near corner pocket, as         the side pocket. The other point, "D,"     doubt the reliability of these shots. But
   shown in Diagram 2, one critical             lies 1 inch from the second diamond        if you are careful in aligning the cue
                                                                                           ball along the critical line, if you shoot
                                                                                           a fairly accurate, half-ball hit, and if
                                                                                           you shoot softly, it's almost impossi-
                                                                                            ble to miss. You will be a believer if
                                                                                            you try it. With a few minutes of prac-
                                                                                            tice, you can make these shots at least
                                                                                            nine out of 10 times.
                                                                                               The carom is somewhat more dif-
                                                                                            ficult if the 9 ball is not squarely lined
                                                                                            up in the pocket. A compensation is
                                                                                            made by moving the cue ball off the
                                                                                            critical line a small amount. To
                                                                                            visualize what is necessary, imagine
                                                                                            that the critical line and the carom line
                                                                                            are joined together as a stick, bent 34
                                                                                            degrees at the foot spot and nailed to
                                                                                            the foot spot about which it could
                                                                                            rotate. If we move the near end of the
                                                                                            stick to the left, the far end moves to
                                                                                            the right, and vice versa. Thus, if the
                                                                                            9 ball is misaligned to the left of the
                                                                                            carom line, the cue ball must be mov-
                                                                                            ed to the right of the critical line. The
                                                                                            amount moved depends on how far
                                                                                            the 9 ball and the cue ball are from the
                                                                                             foot spot. The further the 9 ball, the
                                                                                             less the cue ball has to be shifted.
                                                                                             Judging these shifts requires practice,
                                                                                             but can be quickly learned.
                                                                                                Opportunities such as that depicted
                                                                                             in Diagram 1 do not arise often. But
                                                                                             neither do dead-on, frozen combina-
                                                                                             tions for the 9 ball. Nevertheless, if
                                                                                             you recognize and know how to take
                                                                                             advantage of such gifts, you will win
                                                                                             more games. A game-winning carom
                                                                                             might even break your opponent's
                                                                                             concentration.
                                                                                           Dr. George Onoda is a research scientist at
                                                                                           IBM's Research Division, as well as an avid
                                                                                           pool and billiard player.

22 Billiards Digest • December 1989
                                                     by Dr. George Onoda

         Analyzing The 9-Ball Break
                                      Useful insights on where balls travel.
    THE TYPICAL 9-BALL break shot               the 1 ball moves in the direction of the      right. Occasionally it manages to reach
    is a slam-bang explosion that sends         left-bottom pocket. If hit more on the        the left-corner pocket; rarely does it
    balls rushing in every conceivable          right side, the 1 ball moves more             reach the right-corner pocket. When
    direction at break-neck speeds. Norm-       toward the left-side pocket. The 1 ball       the 9-ball is made on the break, it is
    ally, players and spectators alike          can be directly pocketed in one of            often kicked in by another ball.
    haven't a clue as to the carnage until      three pockets. It can fall in the left-side       Ball ' F " is the second fastest ball to
    the balls have stopped rolling. But are     or left-bottom pocket, or be banked           leave the rack, traveling toward the
    there important trends in the path of       into the right-bottom pocket. If not          right-top corner. It either strikes the
    various balls that we can use to our        pocketed or diverted by a collision, the      long rail or falls directly into the top-
    advantage?                                   1 ball usually ends up at the bottom         right pocket.
        To seek some answers, I began a         half of the table.                                Ball " G " moves weakly forward
    detailed, systematic analysis of tour-         Ball " B " travels along a narrow          and to the left. If not hit by another
    nament video tapes, using slow motion                                                     ball, it often remains near the top rail
    and stop action.                                                                          and the left side. This ball is not
        Before getting into the findings of                                                   pocketed unless kicked by another
    this study, first a few words about                                                       ball.
    notations, definitions and assump-                                                            Ball " H " travels forward and to the
    tions. Ball positions in a rack will be                                                   right with moderate speed. If
    denoted by the letters " A " through                                                      unobstructed, it banks off the top rail
     " I " (Diagram 1). "Collisions" will                                                     and moves toward the right-center
     refer to contact between two object                                                      area of the table. It can occasionally
    balls after the initial rapid impacts oc-                                                 be sunk in the right-side pocket.
     curring within the rack, "Directly"                                                          Ball " 1 , " the third fastest ball leav-
     pocketed balls will be those reaching                                                    ing the rack, banks off the top rail.
    the pocket without collisions and will                                                    The further the 1 ball is truck on the
     include those made by bank shots. The                                                    right side, the more " I " travels to the
     "top" of the table is the foot end,                                                      right. If the " I " ball escapes collisions,
     while the "bottom" of the table is the                                                    it moves to the right-bottom end of the
     head end. Pockets are identified by                                                      table, where it could fall in the corner
     their positions ("left-top," "left-                                                       pocket.
     bottom," etc.) The forward direction                                                         Most top players break from the
     is toward the top, the backward direc-                                                    side, within one diamond of the long
     tion is toward the bottom. The cue ball                                                   rail. The does not increase the chances
     is assumed to be shot from the right                                                      of making ball " F , " the most fre-
     side of the table and directly (full) at                                                  quently pocketed ball. Neither is there
     the 1 ball.                                                                               conclusive evidence that it increases
                                                path, to the left and somewhat back.
        The relative speeds and directions of   In some instances, it banks into the           the chances of making the 9 ball.
     the object balls leaving the rack area     right-side pocket. Otherwise, it tends         However, it most definitely increases
     were observed in hundreds of break         to remain in the middle part of the            the chances of making the 1 ball in the
     shots. Interestingly, a number of          table, unless kicked away.                     left-side pocket (the second most fre-
     systematic trends were seen, as sum-          Ball " C " travels weakly to the right,     quently pocketed shot). The 1 ball
     marized in Diagram 2. The fans in the      either sideways or forward. Because of         moves toward the side pocket if it is
     diagram, emanating from the centers        its slow speed, it does not reach the          struck at the appropriate point on the
     of each object ball, designate relative    top-corner pocket and tends to remain          right side of the cue ball. This is the
     speeds and directions. The longer the      in the top-right part of the table,            only ball where a player has a signifi-
      fan, the greater is the relative speed.   unless kicked away.                            cant opportunity to influence the out-
     The spread of the fan indicates the           Ball " D " is the fastest ball leaving      come. Also, breaking from the side
      range of directions that were observed.   the rack. It was never observed to             causes ball " I " to bank toward the
         As with player introductions, let's    travel directly into the top-left pocket;      right, increasing its chances of falling
      meet the balls in a 9-bali rack:          rather, it strikes the long rail, within       in the bottom-right corner.
         Ball " A " (always the 1 ball) moves   one diamond of the pocket.                        The majority of shots made on the
      to the left and back with slow to            Ball " E " (the 9-ball) is probably the     break are due to directly pocketed
      moderate speed. Its exact path            most unpredictable ball. It moves              balls, while collisions account for the
      depends on where the I ball is hit by     slowly in a generally forward direc-           rest. As expected, the fast-moving
      the cue ball. If hit toward the center,   tion, to the left and sometimes to the         balls (D, F and I) account for most of

26 Billiards Digest • February 1990
    the lucky collisions. Balls D and F           is favorable to you if your opponent     would reveal how to make the 9 ball
    bank around the top corners and col-          sinks a certain ball, place it at F.     on the break.
    lide with slower balls, such as G and            Most players have their own              Even if I knew that secret, would I
    H. Ball I banks off the top rail and          strategies in breaking balls. Hopeful-   give it out for free?
    kicks balls such as H and C. As the           ly, the information I have provided      Dr. George Onoda is a research scientist at
    results of these collisions depend on         will help assess these strategies. I     IBM's Research Division, as well as an avid
    minute differences in timing and path,        apologize to those readers hoping I      pool and billiard player.
    little prediction is possible.
       A widely-held strategy is to try and
    leave the cue ball in the center of the
    table after the break because this in-
    creases the chances of having a shot
    at the 1 ball. Since the analysis shows
    that the 1 ball usually ends up
    somewhere in the bottom half of the
    table, the soundness of this logic is
    supported.
        How can this knowledge affect a
    game?
        Well, when you rack balls, do you
    pay any attention to how you arrange
    them? Several strategies have been
    brought to my attention by colleagues
    Robert Byrne, George Cleveland and
    Steve Priest, among others. Suppose
    you want to increase the chances that
    the 2 ball will lie near the top rail after
    the break, so as to make the transi-
    tion from the 1 ball to the 2 ball more
     difficult for your opponent. The
     analysis indicates that position G is
    most likely to produce this result. If
     you also want the 3 ball to travel to
     the bottom end of the table, positions
     I or B seem favorable.
        The placement of balls could also
     affect a handicap game. It you don't
     want your ball to be sunk by your op-
     ponent, positions C and G appear
     safest. If your opponent changes the
     side from which he breaks, these posi-
     tions become B and H, both still
     relatively safe. In situations where it

28 Billiards Digest • February 1990
                                                       by Dr. George Onoda

                          Seeing The Point
                       Of A Frozen Kiss Shot
                   A sighting method for visualizing the object ball's path.
     IN MOST WALKS of life, a cold kiss              If you find these visualizations dif-    sighted line should correctly point to
     is a truly underwhelming experience.         ficult or unreliable, try this "point"      a pocket's edge, not its center.
         But pool is very special, and few        method: bend down and sight between            Judging kiss shots is a matter of
     aspects of the game are as delicious to      balls A and B in the general direction      good lighting, fairly keen eyesight, and
     behold as a "cold" kiss shot ... at least,   of the pocket (Diagram 2). The "V"          practice. Experiment with the techni-
     to the accomplished player. Let's see        between the balls acts as a rifle sight.    ques described here and see which
     what you can do to improve your abili-       Move your eyes to the left and right,       works best for you; one of them is
     ty to determine whether kiss shots are       looking at the contact point. When          almost certain to.
     really "on" or "off."                        that point looks sharp to you                  One important word of caution: in
         Diagram 1 shows frozen balls A and       (Diagram 2A), you're sighting along         Diagram 1, note the direction of the
     B. Line A-B is drawn through their           the 90-degree line. If your line of sight   cue ball. In order to move ball A 90
     centers. If ball A is struck by a cue ball   is off, the two balls will appear to        degrees from the A-B line, the cue ball
     as shown, its path of travel will be 90      overlap (Diagram 2B). It should be ob-      must make contact well off to the side
     degrees (or perpendicular) to line A-        vious that you do nothing about             of the A-B line. If ball A is struck too
     B. (This relates closely to the concept      shooting ball A until you're correctly      full, relative to the A-B line, you'll get
     discussed recently by almost all             sighted.                                    markedly different results. The path
     Billiards Digest instructional writers:         Notice, in Diagram 1, that it is the     of Ball A deviates forward from the
     on all cut shots, a cue ball struck with     edge of ball A - not the center - which     90-degree line. Just why and how will
     stop shot action will deflect 90 degrees     follows the 90-degree sight line. The       be discussed in a future article.
     from the path of the object ball.)           path of the center of ball A is shifted     Dr. George Onoda is a research scientist at
         In any case, it's obvious that if you    by half the width of the ball. So your      IBM, and an avid pool and billiard player.
     expect to pocket ball A, or any other
     kiss shot, you'll have to visualize that
     90° direction accurately. Some players
     appear to do this with no conscious ef-
     fort at all. One conscious technique is
     to point at the A-B line with your cue,
     and extend your hand across it (as
     though making an oversize plus sign).
      If your hand points to a pocket, you're
     in business. Another is to stand at the
     pocket you want for the shot, and
     visualize an imaginary line (or place
      your cue along it) from the center of
      the pocket to the contact point be-
      tween balls A and B. If that line and
      the A-B line seem perpendicular, or if
      the two balls seem to be the same
      distance from the pocket, that kiss
      shot is "on."

28   Billiards Digest • April 1990
             by Dr. George Onoda

                                   Play For Show,
                                  Or Play For Dough
                                  Winning 9-ball games with safety play.
    IN MOST 9-BALL tournaments, you              object ball rather easily by banking the   scratched, three if he hasn't. So when
    have two ways to win a game: you sink        cue ball, you've gained very little ex-    you are planning your first safety shot,
    the 9-ball legally, or your opponent         cept to keep him from pocketing, and       you must figure where the object ball
    "scratches-out" (that is, scratches          he might get lucky and leave you safe.     will end up after the shot; it is not
    three times in a row). In professional       In planning your safety shot, imagine      enough to merely hide it. The object
    play, almost all games are won by            where you intend to place the cue ball     ball must lie where it will be easy for
    making the 9-ball. Safeties are used for     and object ball with the shot, and then    you to execute the second safety shot.
    various tactical reasons, but they are       put yourself in your opponent's place.     If you don't have that kind of advan-
    seldom used to force a scratch-out. In       If you've left him where it's impossi-     tageous lie, rethink your first safety
    amateur play, on the other hand, there       ble, or at least very difficult, for him   shot until you find a strategy that gives
    are more opportunities to win games          to see a way to hit the object ball,       you a better chance of forcing two
    by forcing a scratch-out. Here's why         you've made a good choice.                 consecutive scratches.
    this is so, along with some examples            Now for the most important aspect          Suppose the balls lie as in Diagram
    of winning with safety plays in              of winning safety play. Remember,          1. Your opponent has scratched, and
    amateur competition.                         you need to force two more scratches       you have ball in hand. Your chances
        Forcing a scratch-out on a profes-       in a row if your opponent has just         of running out are not very good —
    sional is far more difficult than on an
    amateur. A pro seldom scratches on
    his own, while an amateur does so oc-
    casionally and sometimes frequently.
    A pro can usually "kick" successful-
    ly at a ball; amateurs have less success
    at that. It is especially unlikely that a
    pro would miss a kick two or three
    times in a row, while many amateurs
    are quite capable of such misplays.
        So if you compete at the amateur
     level, you should not focus all your at-
    tention on running out, or on sinking
     the 9-ball on a combination or kiss
    shot. You should also consider forc-
     ing a scratch-out, particularly if your
    opponent has just scratched. You
     should realistically assess the chances
     of sinking the 9-ball versus the chances
     of scratching-out your opponent.
     Your decision rests upon how the balls
     lie upon the table.
        Your best chance to play for a run-
     out usually comes up when the balls
     are spread apart. But when balls are
     clustered, as they often tend to be near
     the beginning of a game, the run-out
     may be more difficult, and safety play
     considerably easier. A cluster can be
     used to your great advantage as a bar-
     rier, when you shoot the cue ball to
     one side and the object ball to the
     other, leaving no clear shot.
         When using a cluster as a barrier in
     this way, you want to make sure that
     it is difficult for your opponent to kick
      at the object ball. If he can get to the

30 Billiards Digest • June 1990
but notice how the 3-, 4- and 5-balls
are clustered. An effective strategy
here would be to place the cue ball as
shown, and shoot the 2-ball to A, leav-
ing the cue ball at B. This leaves a dif-
ficult kick shot for your opponent. At
the same time, the 2-ball has been
moved near another cluster, where you
can execute a second effective safety
by shooting the 2-ball to E and leav-
ing the cue ball at D (as in Diagram 2).
   You could also use the same cluster
for both safeties by shooting the 2-ball
to C, while putting the cue ball at B
(dotted lines in each diagram). After
the scratch, the 2-ball is shot to F,
leaving the cue ball at G (Diagram 2).
   If the 2-ball is not near a cluster to
begin with, any nearby ball may serve
adequately as the first barrier. For ex-
ample, if the 3- and 5-balls were
removed from Diagram 1, you could
still hide the cue ball behind the 4-ball,
near point B. While it's more difficult
to put the cue ball behind one object
ball instead of a three-ball cluster, this
shot can be mastered with practice.
   Finally, I realize that some readers
will not like the strategy of winning
with safeties. Obviously it's more spec-
tacular and satisfying to execute a
tough run-out. And if you know you
can out shoot your opponent, why
bother with a scratch-out strategy at
all? For one simple reason: there is
considerable luck in 9-ball. If you fail
to run the table, your opponent might
slop in the 9-ball on his next shot. So
you'd be wiser to go for the win im-
mediately by whatever means possible.
A game you win through defensive,
play counts for just as much as one
you win by running all the balls.
   Some opponents might consider it
poor sportsmanship, even less "man-
ly", to win a game by forcing a
 scratch-out. But remember, you aren't
 breaking any rules; what you're doing,
 in fact, is taking advantage of one.
 You're playing smart. You're playing
 for "dough," and not for "show."
Dr. George Onoda is a research scientist at
IBM, and an avid pool and billiard player.
       by Dr. George Onoda

           Avoiding Miscues On Draw Shots
                    Believe it or not, most miscues on draw shots
                    are caused by hitting the cloth before the ball.
DRAW SHOTS ARE often difficult              the distance from the center to the          mark on the paper, assuming your cue
for novices and some intermediate           edge of the ball (point A in Fig. 1).        was level or close to it, then the miscue
players. A mediocre draw shot results       Miscues do not occur if the ball is          occurred because the table surface was
from not striking the ball low enough.      struck within the striped zone; but they     struck first.
But when a lower strike is attempted,       almost always occur when the ball is            When I carried out this experiment
the dreaded miscue frequently occurs,       struck in the white area. Try this ex-       with players who miscued frequently
especially on more forceful strokes.        periment to see if your results are the      on draw shots, I found that in most
Such miscues are sometimes attributed       same as mine.                                cases, their miscues were caused by the
to a poorly chalked cue, or by the             Some players believe that the cue         tips' striking the table first. Only in a
ball's being struck too low. But my         ball can be struck beyond this halfway       few instances could the miscues be at-
studies reveal that the prevalent cause     point. When the true contact point lies      tributed to hitting the ball too low, in-
for a miscue is that the cue tip strikes    at the edge of the stripe, the center line   stead of hitting the table first.
the table surface before striking the       of the cue points to the white area.            These results led me to understand
ball. I'll show you how I came to this                                                   why it is so difficult to strike the
conclusion, using simple experiments                                                     halfway point between the center and
that you can try yourself to .confirm                                                    bottom edge of the ball. The clearance
my results.                                                                              between the bottom edge of the cue
   The first experiment determines                                                       and the table surface is quite small.
how far off-center a ball can be struck                                                  With a cue tip of 13 mm diameter, and
without a miscue, using a well-chalked                                                   a curvature of a nickel, a strike at the
cue. Although we are primarily in-                                                       bottom edge of the stripe has a
terested in how low a ball can be                                                        clearance of only a few millimeters
struck below center, it is easier to                                                     (1/16 to 1/8 inch) between the bottom
determine the maximum off-center                                                         of the tip and the table surface (Fig.
strike with side English instead, which                                                  2). A cue tip that strays downward by
should be the same as for the max-          The edge of the stripe on a ball is half-    a few millimeters during the stroke
imum distance below center. A useful        way between the center and edge of the       would strike the table first. The tip
fact is that the width of the stripe on     ball. Point A is the maximum off-center      would rebound from the table and
a striped pool ball is exactly half the     strike point without incurring a miscue.     strike the ball with an upward force
diameter of the ball (Fig. 1). When a       This gives the mistaken impression           component, causing the ball to jump
striped ball is used as the cue ball, the   that the ball is being struck outside the    erratically. This effect can be seen by
edge of the stripe itself serves as a       striped area.                                intentionally striking the table just
useful reference point. With the stripe                                                  before the ball.
                                                The next experiment determines
facing you (Fig. 1), a strike within the    why miscues occur in draw shots,                From what we've just learned, three
striped area is off-center by less than     assuming the tip is well-chalked. Clean      methods for preventing miscues on
half the radius of the ball. A strike in    a striped ball, removing all chalk           draw shots become evident: 1) Use a
the white area is more than halfway         marks. Align the stripe horizontally,        slightly inclined cue; 2) Use a cue with
from the center to the edge of the ball.    as in Fig. 2. Slide the edge of a white      a smaller tip; or 3) Develop a more ac-
This experiment involves the follow-        sheet of paper against the bottom of         curate stroke. For most cases, the
ing steps: Remove all traces of chalk       the ball, with the paper nearest you.        third is the best solution, since the first
marks from the ball. Align the ball so      If your tip contacts the ball before hit-    two have other drawbacks on many
that it appears as in Fig. 1. Apply a       ting the ball, no chalk mark will ap-        shots; let's examine those drawbacks
 liberal amount of chalk to your tip.       pear on the paper. If the table is struck    next.
Strike the ball to the left of center.      before the ball, a telltale mark will ap-       An inclined cue increases the
Note where the new chalk mark ap-           pear on the paper. Try to strike the         distance between the bottom of the cue
 pears on the ball. Repeat these steps      ball at the lower edge of the stripe,        tip and the surface of the table, as seen
 many times, while varying the strike       with a level cue. When a miscue oc-          in Fig. 3. This reduces the chance of
 distance from the center. Keep track       curs, check the paper and the ball for       striking the table first. Drawing with
 of where the chalk mark appears after       chalk marks. If the miscue occurred         an inclined cue is sometimes necessary,
 a successful draw shot and after a         without a mark on the paper, see if the      as when another ball must be shot
 miscue.                                     chalk mark on the ball is below the         over, or when the cue ball is near a
    I have found that the maximum off-       striped zone, which would indicate          rail. For the majority of shots, though,
 center distance that a ball can be          that the miscue occurred because the        a more level cue has advantages over
 reliably struck without a miscue is half    ball was struck too low. If there is a      an inclined cue. With an inclined cue,

                                                                                                          Billiards Digest • August 1991 27
    it is more difficult to aim; it is likely                                                  stroke, seek help from a house pro if
    that the ball will jump (as in a jump                                                      possible, explaining what you want to
    shot); and it is inevitable that the ball                                                  accomplish. Or study your stroke with
    will curve if struck to the left or right                                                  a video system or a mirror. See if you
    of center.                                                                                 lower the tip as it approaches the ball.
       The size of the cue tip is a factor in                                                  Practice developing a smooth,
    the difficulty of striking the halfway                                                     straight, level stroke with a straight
    point on the ball. A smaller tip in-                                                       follow-through. Use a short bridge-to-
    creases the distance between the bot-                                                      ball distance to minimize the effects of
    tom of the tip and the table surface                                                       an upward motion of the cue butt dur-
    when using draw. The clearance is in-                                                      ing the stroke. Make a snug, closed
    creased by about 50 percent when swit-                                                     bridge to help keep the cue in line. At
    ching from a 13 mm cue tip to a 12                                                         first, concentrate on striking the ball
    mm. But too small a tip wears out           A ball struck halfway between the center
                                                and bottom of the bail provides only a         softly at the halfway point between its
    more readily. Also, a thin shaft is                                                        center and bottom edge, with the cue
                                                few millimeters of clearance between
    believed to cause greater squirt (deflec-   the cue and the table. A miscue occurs         ball around one foot from the object
    tion), where a ball struck with left or     if the table is struck first accidentally.     ball. You might be surprised how
    right English deviates somewhat from                                                       much draw you can get even with
    the aimed direction. We can now                                                            a soft stroke, if you successfully
    understand why tips are not larger                                                         strike the ball at the halfway point.
    than about 14 mm. If they were, it                                                         As you become more proficient with
    would be impossible to strike the                                                          the soft stroke, gradually increase the
    halfway point below the center of the                                                       speed of the stroke until you can ex-
    ball because there would be no
    clearance for the tip.                                                                     ecute a strong draw shot without mis-
                                                                                                cuing.
        In most cases, the best solutions for                                                     How well you can draw a ball with
    avoiding miscues are to use as level a                                                      considerable force is in fact a good
    cue as possible, and improve the ac-                                                        measure of the quality of your stroke
    curacy of your stroke. For optimum                                                          in general. All the knowledge of how
    draw, the ball should be struck at the                                                      balls react on various shots is of
    halfway point between the center and        The clearance between the cue tip and table
                                                is now much greater. The likelihood of
                                                                                               limited value until a good stroke is
     edge of the ball without striking the                                                      developed. More attention should be
                                                striking the table first is greatly reduced.
    table first. This requires an accuracy                                                      given to improving your stroke before
     of less than a few millimeters in the      ing the ball somewhat to the left or            worrying too much about learning the
     placement of the cue tip on the target     right of center by at least a few               other skills of the game. Emphasize
     spot on the ball. That accuracy is not     millimeters. The same inaccuracy in             practice exercises; remember that con-
     so easy to accomplish. For example,        the downward direction would exceed             cert pianists began by laboriously
    if you have trouble banking a ball in       the clearance dimension of an op-               practicing fingering drills for many
     the long direction of the table so that    timum draw shot, causing the table to           years.
    it comes back to hit your cue tip, it       be struck before the ball.                     Dr. George Onoda is a research scientist at
     means that you are accidentally strik-        To improve the accuracy of your             IBM and an avid pool and billiard player.

28 Billiards Digest • August 1991
       by Dr. George Onoda

                           Coping With Skid
Sometimes the cue ball grabs the object ball and throws it off line.
      Here's why it happens and what you can do about it.
IT DOESN'T MATTER if you shoot                 Book of Pool and Billiards, 1987 Ed.,            One or more chalk marks always ex-
like me or you shoot like Earl                 page 129). He calls this phenomenon           ist on a cue ball. The mere act of
Strickland, Nick Varner, Mike Sigel or         "cling," but I will stay with "skid"          striking the ball with a chalked cue
Allen Hopkins; we are all cursed oc-           since players seem to use this term fre-      produces a fresh chalk mark on the
casionally by the dreaded "skid" shot.         quently. Byrne's theory is that skid oc-      ball. Typically, a fresh chalk mark is
In a skid shot, an object ball that is         curs when the normal friction between         around a quarter of an inch in width.
cut toward a pocket travels in a direc-        the ball surfaces is increased. The in-       As the ball moves along the table, a
tion as if it were cut less thin. At the       creased friction causes the ball to be        chalk mark becomes duller and
same time, the object ball seems to            thrown in a more forwardly direction          smaller with time. But it may take a
skid (slide) more than normal. Judg-           than normal in most types of shots. In        half dozen shots before a particular
ing from color commentaries in                 Byrne's Treasury of Trick Shots in            chalk mark completely disappears.
various taped matches, many top pro-           Pool and Billiards, pages 152 and 153,        Therefore, beside the fresh chalk mark
fessionals find skid a mystery. Skid           he describes several insightful ex-           produced by a shot, several older and
only happens occasionally, perhaps             periments by Robert Jewett and Bill           weaker marks are usually present on
once during a long 9-ball set or dur-          Marshall. When chalk marks were               the surface of the cue ball.
ing a straight pool match. This would          placed at the contact points between             If the contact point of the cue ball
amount to around one in 100 to 200             two colliding or frozen balls, throw of       with the object ball just happens to
shots (as a rough estimate).                   cut shots was greatly increased. Since        coincide with a chalk mark on the cue
   I believe that the skid phenomenon          chalk increases the friction between          ball, then enhanced throw can be ex-
has already been explained correctly           two balls, the experiments support            pected. And if the cue ball has forward
by Robert Byrne (Byrne's Standard              Byrne's theory.                               roll, a pronounced transfer of English
                                                                                             occurs, giving the object ball some in-
                                                                                             itial back spin. The transition from
                                                                                             back spin to zero spin and forward
                                                                                             spin of the object ball is lengthened,
                                                                                             accounting for the appearance of
                                                                                             skidding.
                                                                                                 Byrne (in his first cited book)
                                                                                             suggests that sweat, hair oil and grease
                                                                                             from french fries could also increase
                                                                                             the friction between balls. But most
                                                                                             evidence indicates that these
                                                                                             substances by themselves should
                                                                                              reduce friction. It seems more likely
                                                                                             that these foreign substances cause
                                                                                             chalk to cling more strongly to a cue
Figure 1: When the cue ball is struck with high-outside or low-inside English (relative to    ball and last longer as the ball moves
the object ball) there is no chance of the fresh chalk mark being at the contact point.       around the table.
                                                                                                 Just what are the chances that a
                                                                                              chalk mark will be present at the point
                                                                                              of contact with an object ball? A
                                                                                              quarter-inch mark covers 0.5 one per-
                                                                                              cent of the surface of the ball. If the
                                                                                              location of one chalk mark is random
                                                                                              when two balls collide, the chance that
                                                                                              the chalk mark is at the contact point
                                                                                              is around 1 in 200 . If other chalk
                                                                                              marks remain from prior shots, more
                                                                                              of the ball's surface is covered with
                                                                                              chalk, and the odds for chalk at the
                                                                                              contact point increase, perhaps to bet-
                                                                                              ter than 1 in 100.
Figure 2: When the cue ball is struck with high-inside or low-outside, English, there is         The greatest likelihood of skid oc-
a chance for a fresh chalk mark to be at the contact point and causing undesired skid.        curring is expected when a succession

                                                                                                          Billiards Digest • December 1991 25
of shots are taken where the cue ball       the side of the object ball (Fig. 1). The    could be instigated, however. Wiping
has traveled only short distances. This     same axis inclination occurs when a          the cue ball with a clean cloth at every
is because less chalk is rubbed off from    ball is struck low and inside. A fresh       practical opportunity would make
previous shots, because the total           chalk mark travels along a small cir-        sense. Possible opportunities include
distance traveled by the cue ball is        cle, as illustrated in Fig. 1. We see that   before each game and after each
smaller. This expectation seems to be       the fresh chalk mark cannot be pre-          scratch when the ball is in hand. Also,
confirmed by watching tournament            sent at the contact point. Thus, only        perhaps in a refereed match, a player
tapes.                                      an older chalk mark could possibly           can request the cleaning of the cue ball
   In shorter shots, the odds that a        cause skidding for this type of shot.        where it lies. The referee would allow
fresh chalk mark will be at the contact         When a cue ball is struck high and       the request if he judges that a slight
point with an object ball are much less     inside, or low and outside, the spin         error in replacement of the ball is not
random. The odds depend on how the          axis is inclined away from the side of       critical to the next shot. Another
cue ball spins as it moves toward the       the object ball (Fig. 2). The path of a      important precaution, already carried
object ball. When the cue ball is shot      fresh chalk mark is illustrated in Fig.      out in some tournaments, is that balls
without side spin, the fresh chalk mark     2. Depending on the angle of the cut         should always be racked by referees
cannot come into contact with the ob-       and the amount of English applied,           wearing clean, white gloves. This
ject ball for a cut angle greater than      there is a chance that the fresh chalk       would reduce placing moisture, oil or
a few degrees. The forward or               mark would be located at the contact         grease on the balls.
backward spin causes the chalk mark         point between the balls.                         Two final precautions could also be
to remain located somewhere along a             While we have no control over            taken. One is to wash all balls
vertical circle around the center,          where an older chalk mark will lie on        thoroughly before each day. The other
oriented in the forward direction. The      a cue ball, we do have some control          is to use balls that are relatively new.
contact point lies to either side of this    for fresh chalk marks, which are the        This reduces the chances of a ball
path and therefore cannot coincide          most damaging. Summarizing the               having a local rough spot, which
with the location of the fresh chalk        effects of spin, a fresh chalk mark will     would also cause increased friction
mark. Of course, an older mark could        not contribute to skid when an object        between balls because of its roughness
still cause a problem.                      ball is cut if the cue ball has no side      or because it readily collects chalk par-
    When a cue ball is sliding with side     spin, if it is struck high and outside or   ticles. If a ball with a damaged rough
spin over a short ball-to-ball distance,    if it is struck low and inside. Beware       spot is found, it should be replaced.
the path of the chalk mark is a              of shots where the ball is struck high          The phenomenon of skid is perhaps
horizontal circle about the center. This     and inside, low and outside, or when        the most unfortunate accident in pool.
gives it a chance to be at the contact      the cue ball slides with side English,       It occurs irrespective of the ability the
point and cause skidding. It can be          since the possibility exists that the       player. It could lose a match for a
approximated (using advanced theory)         fresh chalk will cause skid.                player through no fault of his own.
that a cue ball with maximum side spin          In theory, the best preventive for the    Currently, we just accept it as an
will complete half a revolution              harm done by an older chalk mark is          unlucky incident that is part of the
 sideways over a distance of around 4        to clean the ball before each shot. But      game. However, it still seems unfair
inches and one and a half revolutions        in a game, this would hardly be prac-        if it is not the fault of the player. I
 over 12 inches. With less side spin, the    tical. It would slow the game down too       believe that the precautions that I have
 distance for these particular revolu-       much and would cause arguments over          mentioned should be given serious
 tions become greater.                       the ball placement in cases where a          consideration for tournament play.
    When a cue ball is struck high and       very small error in replacement could
 outside (relative to the cut), it spins     critically affect making a shot.            Dr. George Onoda is a research scientist at
 about an inclined axis, leaning toward         A number of practical precautions        IBM and an avid pool and billiard player.

                                                                                                      Billiards Digest • December 1991   27
            by Dr. George Onoda

                      Practicing Stun Shots
                       Simple geometry, using a semicircle, can help
                     determine if you are executing stun shots properly.

   A STOP SHOT occurs when the cue                We can extend this idea, through        object ball on this semicircle. Then the
   ball collides with an object ball head-      further use of geometry, to find other    lines from the ball to the two pockets
   on and has neither forward spin nor          positions on a table that form            are at 90 degrees to each other. The
   backward spin at the moment of con-          90-degree angles to two pockets. We       position of the cue ball when it strikes
   tact. A stun shot is a cut shot having       use the properties of a semicircle,       the object ball is slightly outside of the
   the identical cue-ball action as the stop    which is a half circle. From any point    semicircle, but to a first approxima-
   shot. Because the cue ball in a stun         along the semicircle, two lines drawn     tion, we can suppose that it is essen-
   shot has no forward or backward spin,        to the end points of the semicircle are   tially on the semicircle. Then when the
   its path after the carom is a straight       always at an angle of 90 degrees to       object ball is sunk in one pocket and
   line that is perpendicular to the object     each other. We can now imagine a          the cue ball falls in the other pocket,
   ball's path. I will refer to this cue ball   semicircle extending from one pocket      you are applying proper stun action.
   path as the 90-degree path. As discuss-      to another on a table and we place the    This method can be applied to two
   ed often in previous articles in this
   magazine, the 90-degree path resulting
    from a stun shot serves as very useful
    reference for position play.
       A stun shot is not easy to execute
    accurately for several reasons. It
    depends on three variables; the
    distance between the balls, the speed
    of the shot and the amount of initial
    back spin applied. It also requires ade-
    quate visualization of the 90-degree
    path.
       Proper execution of stun shots re-
    quires practice. The stop shot should
    be mastered first, as it will provide a
    sense of the proper action needed for
    a stun shot. Then practice various
    drills with cut shots, such as those
    described in this article.
       Because the stun shot involves a
    90-degree angle, simple geometry can
    be used as guide for setting up shots
    to practice. A head or foot spot is
    equidistant to four pockets, two cor-
    ner and two side pockets. Lines drawn
    from these pockets to the spot form
    90-degree angles. So we can place the
    object ball on a spot and sink it into
    one of these pockets. If the cue ball
    falls in an adjacent pocket or comes
    close, we are applying stun action
    about as accurately as we can expect.
    For example, as illustrated in Diagram
     la, shooting the object ball into a cor-
    ner pocket while sinking the cue ball
    in the other pocket indicates that the
    stun action is correct. The same can
    be said when the object ball is cut in-
    to the corner pocket as illustrated in
     Diagram lb, and the cue ball falls in
     the side pocket.

20 Billiards Digest • February 1992
corner pockets (Diagram 2a), a corner       the object ball is pocketed, and the
pocket and an adjacent side pocket          cue ball falls in the other pocket or
(Diagram 2b), two corner pockets            comes close to it, you are properly ex-
along a long rail (Diagram 3), and two      ecuting stun shot. Practice with the
side pockets (Diagram 4). Whenever          different semicircles and with varying
the object lies along one of these          angles and distances between the cue
semicircles, a cue ball with stun action    ball and the object ball.
travels toward one pocket when the             In the next article, it will be shown
object ball is cut into the other pocket.   how the semicircle method can be ap-
   To use this method for practicing        plied in game situations.
stun shot, place an object ball at a spot   Dr. George Onoda is a research scientist at
or along one of the semicircles. When       IBM and an avid pool and billiard player.

                                                                                          Billiards Digest • February 1992 21
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/finding_your_perfect_stance.pdf
title: Finding Your Perfect Stance
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Finding Your Perfect Stance”                                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     Are you happy with your pool stance? Do you think it is the best possible stance for you as an individual?
If you are not sure about the answers to these questions, you have come to the right place. Recently, I
posted online video NV J.21 that offers lots of good stance advice. Be sure to watch this video because it
demonstrates everything described in this article.

    Before beginning, I want to make it clear that the stance can be a very individual thing, and you need to
do what works best for you, and not just do what some book or video prescribes. The important aspects of
any good stance are stability, good and consistent visual alignment, good and consistent stroke plane
alignment, stroke clearance, straight-line motion of the cue during the stroke, and comfort over the long term.
The ideal feet placement, body position, knee bend, head height, and other stance mechanics issues can
vary a lot from one person to the next based on the person’s height, flexibility, body shape and anatomy,
comfort level, and any physical issues.

    First, let’s look at the generally accepted “textbook” pool stance shown in Photo 1. The ball of the back
foot is on the line of the shot (shown with the blue tape on the floor). It can be anywhere between 45˚ and
perpendicular to the shot line. This angle can vary for individuals, especially if one is duck-footed or pigeon-
toed. The back-leg knee is locked. The other foot is forward about 45˚ and points in the direction of the shot
or at a slight angle. The front-leg knee can also be locked or have a slight bend. Locked knees can help
some people with stability. The feet should be at least shoulder-width apart. The upper body is bent down at
the waist to get the head lower to the shot. The bridge arm is fully extended. The legs and bridge form a
stable tripod, with only a little weight on the bridge hand or arm and the remaining weight shared equally
between the feet. As shown in Photo 2, ideally, the shoulder, entire arm, bridge, cue, and vision center
should be in the vertical plane of the shot. As shown with the white lines in Photo 1, the cue should be as
level as possible and the forearm should be perpendicular to the cue at cue ball (CB) address. Finally, there
should be clearance between the body arm, and cue during the entire stroking motion.

                                      Photo 1 “Textbook” pool stance

Billiards Digest                                                                                  December, 2019
                                   Photo 2 Everything in the vertical plane

     Now let’s look at a typical snooker stance show in Photo 3. The body is more open, and the front foot is
only a little in front of, or even adjacent to, the back foot. Both feet generally face the shot, but they can be at
slight angles. The front leg is typically bent a little more. Snooker players have their head low with the cue in
contact with chest and chin to help ensure consistent visual alignment, and to constrain and guide the cue to
move straight during the stroke. An open stance can allow your face to be more square to the shot with less
neck twisting. This can make it easier to get the head lower, which can make aiming and sighting more
consistent and accurate, which is especially important on a snooker table that is larger and has smaller
pockets. The open posture also allows you to use your standard stance when your body is up against the
table to reach a shot, which can happen more on large snooker tables. Some people claim you can’t
generate enough power with a snooker-style stance. This might be true for a pool break shot, but it is total
nonsense otherwise.

                                       Photo 3 Typical snooker stance

    Regardless of which type of stance you use, it is best to have your head as low as possible. This helps
you better visualize the line of the shot, the tip contact point on the CB, and the target position at the object

Billiards Digest                                                                                     December, 2019
ball (OB) without needing to move the eyes very much. One way to get low is to bend at the waist more, but
this can cause neck and hamstring strain, tension, and pain. A good alternative, especially if you are tall like
me, is to bend the knees and/or spread your feet as shown in Photo 4. Bending the knees allows you to
bring everything down without any body or neck contortion. An athletic bent-knee stance can be just as solid
as a locked-knee stance; although, as with any stance, you do need to be careful to keep your head and body
still during the stroke. Bending the knees can cause more tiring in the thighs if you play for long periods of
time (especially if you are not in good shape); but this is better than neck, back, and/or hamstring strain,
which can become chronic and make it difficult and uncomfortable to play. As shown in Photo 5, it is also
best to have your face as square to the shot as possible with your eyes as level as possible, with your vision
center over the cue. For reasons why, see the articles, videos, and other information on the “vision center”
resource page in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.

                                         Photo 4 Bent-knee stance

                                    Photo 5 Eyes level with face square

Billiards Digest                                                                                  December, 2019
     For some people, especially those with an open stance, it can be difficult to position the upper arm and
shoulder in the shot plane. You might need to pull your shoulder back and/or add body and neck twist and
turn, which might not be comfortable. But this might not be necessary. If the elbow and forearm are in the
shot plane, you can still create a straight stroke. The problem with an out-of-plane forearm is the stroke will
move the grip hand in an arc, and the cue will not go straight. One way to find the best shoulder and elbow
position for you is to shake, wiggle, and swing your arm like a “wet noodle” to find how the arm likes to hang
and swing so the cue goes straight. The elbow is not a simple pin joint or hinge, and you can create a straight
stroke in many directions, but it is best to find the direction that is most natural for you. It can also help to
attempt to find natural feet, knee, hip, and body position to get your face and eyes in the right place. To do
this, get down in your stance and dance around, changing everything until you settle into what feels the most
stable and comfortable. It can help to do this in front of a mirror where you can verify that your face is as
square to the shot as possible, with your eyes as level as possible. Try to keep your head still while you
dance around, like a chicken. If you have a problem with stroke body clearance, you can swivel your hips or
move your feet to create space. Once you find a stance that feels good, make sure you verify that the cue
moves straight during the stroke. A good place to do this is over the straight edge of the cushion on the rail.
You can also set up a donut (self-adhesive hole reinforcement label) in front of the CB where the cue tip
should finish. This will help verify that your stroke and follow through are straight.

    Sometimes you will need to modify your stance to deal with different shot situations. Sometimes you
need to reach for a long shot, lean over the side of the table, elevate the stance quite a bit, or have a leg up
on the table. In all these cases, it is important to try to keep the head and forearm in the ideal positions as
closely as possible. In online video NV J.21, notice how I keep my head and forearm fairly still and consistent
even with these radically different stance contortions.

    I hope the information in this article and online video NV J.21 help you find your personal best pool
stance. The stance is the foundation of your entire game, so it is important. Again, be sure to watch the
video, which demonstrates everything in this article. Also check out online videos NV J.13 and NV D.7 that
contain additional stance technique advice.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.21 – How to Find the Perfect Pool/Snooker/Billiards Stance
                    NV J.13 – Top 10 Things Pool Players Do Wrong … and How to Fix Them
normal video        NV D.7 – Pool Fundamentals – The Stance – from Vol-I of the Billiard University instructional
                    video series

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       December, 2019
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/follow_control.pdf
title: Follow Control
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
“Follow Control”                                                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at drdavepoolinfo.com. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

      Have you ever heard the saying: “Draw for show. Follow for dough?” It refers to the fact that it is much
easier to predict and control cue ball (CB) direction and travel distance with follow shots. This enables precise
position play, scratch avoidance, and lock-up safeties. To be able to execute all a wide range of follow shots
accurately and with confidence, it helps to know some basic principles. It also helps to practice follow-control
drills. Below, I’ll summarize useful advice pertaining to these things from a recent online video (NV L.83). The
focus is on nearly straight follow shots.

     Probably the best advice for follow shot control is to use a high tip and vary your stroke length based on
the desired follow distance. If you use a consistent, smoothly accelerating stroke, shot speed is directly related
to stroke length. With normal shots, every 1/8 of my stroke gives about a diamond of follow distance (see
Image 1). This will obviously depend on the player and table conditions, but it works well for me on most
equipment. Try the drill shown in the video if you want to find out how well this works for you. An 1/8 stroke
length should send the CB forward about 1 diamond. A 2/8 or 1/4 stroke should send the CB forward about
two diamonds. As shown in the video, try every 1/8 up to a full stroke, using the same smoothly accelerating
stroke for each shot. Note that with the CB close to object ball (OB), and with fast shot speed, a high tip position
is required to guarantee full topspin roll at the OB.

                                           Image 1 Stroke fractions

    A useful follow reference is knowing how far the OB will travel as a factor of a given CB follow distance.
With a full hit and typical ball conditions, the OB travels about 7.5-times as far as a rolling CB. Image 2 shows
a good test shot to try on your table to see how close the balls get to the 7.5x factor. With the OB starting 7
diamonds from the head rail, if the CB follows forward 1 diamond with full topspin roll, the OB should just barely
bounce off the head cushion.

Billiards Digest                                       1                                                 August 2025
                                         Image 2 CB-OB follow ratio

    As shown in online super-slow-motion video HSV B.15, when a rolling ball hits a cushion straight on, it
loses about half its speed. When ½ the speed is lost, the ball will travel only ¼ of the distance it would have if
the table were longer with no cushion. The ½ and ¼ factors obviously depend some on rail and cushion
properties. For example, the numbers would be smaller on a bouncy Diamond-brand table. With a little simple
math, you can use the 7.5x factor to predict OB travel distance even when the OB bounces off a cushion. For
example (see Image 3), with a ½ (4/8) stroke, the CB travels forward 4 diamonds. 7.5-times that is 30. 6
diamonds to the cushion leaves 24, and ¼ of that is 6, so the OB travels 6 diamonds off the cushion.

                                   Image 3 Rebound distance off cushion

Billiards Digest                                      2                                                August 2025
      Another useful reference is the OB distance from the rail where a rolling CB follows forward to the end rail
and banks the OB straight back to the other end rail (see Image 4). As shown in recent online video NV L.82,
this is a useful reference in the game of one-pocket. But it is also a good way to compare tables to get a feel
for the bounciness of the cushions. It also offers a good speed-control practice drill. As demonstrated in online
video NV L.83, if the OB is too far from the rail, the OB makes it to the rail, but the CB does not. And if the OB
is too close to the rail, the CB makes it to the rail, but the OB does not. Again, there is a precise distance for
every table (see the “reference line” in Image 4), where both balls barely get to the end rails with the right speed.
It is a fun and useful exercise to find both the distance and shot speed required to do this.

                                          Image 4 Follow speed reference

    Be sure to watch online video NV L.83 to see everything demonstrated. Also try out everything the next
time you are at a table. Being able to “follow for the dough” with confidence can help you win many games and
matches.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV L.82 – Straight-Back Bank SPEED REFERENCE Useful for All Pool Games
   normal video
                    NV L.83 – FOLLOW SHOT CONTROL Principles and Drills

                    HSV B.15 – straight-on kick shot rebound losses and spin changes for roll, stun, and draw
  high-speedvideo   shots

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at drdavepoolinfo.com.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.
Billiards Digest                                         3                                                 August 2025
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/frontal_impact_of_rolling_spheres.pdf
title: Phys Educ 1(1(1991) PrintedintheUK Frontal impact of rolling spheres
topics: collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
Phys Educ 1(1(1991) PrintedintheUK

Frontal impact of rolling spheres

A Domenech and E Casasus

A model ol Iha InelasWc colllslon between lwo            expressed in terms of normal and tangential impul-
spheres rolllng along a horlzontal badr Is pre           sive forces, as depicted in figure I . The tangential
senled, taklng Into a a w n l the etfects of frldlonal   impulsive forces will be considered as frictional
forces at Impact The slmple experlment d e k             forces acting during the time interval of impact.
crlbed makes posslble dlred eslfmates of the                If we denote by v, (j=1,2) the velocities of the
coefflclentsof restlMlon and frldlon.                    centres of mass of the spheres immediately after
                                                         impact, then conservation of momentum can be
                                                         expressed by
Experiments on collions are usually employed
as examoles of the laws of conservation: in oar-                      mlui + m 2 u 2 = m l v +m2v2
                                                                                             ,               (1)
ticular, frontal and oblique collisions between          where m, (j=1,2) are the masses of the spheres. On
rolling spheres have been frequently referred to in      the other hand, the inelasticity of the impact is
physics texts. The simple approach to the problem        expressed in       of the coefficient of restitution,
of colliding spheres assumes that no rolling occurs
                                                         e, by the equation
and omits the effects due to the frictional forces at
impact. In this paper, we attempt to develop a                             v2-vI=e(u1-u2)                    (2)
more general approach to the problem of the
frontal collisions between rolling spheres. It takes     in which we assume, explicitly, thai e is a con-
into account the inelasticity of impact and the          stant that depends only on the materials of the
frictional forces acting throughout the collision.       spheres. This is a simplification valid under certain
These are expressed, respectively, in terms of the       conditions (Goldsmith 1960).
coefficient of restitution, e, and the coefficient of       Introducing the ratio of the masses, M , defined
sliding friction, p, in accordance with the general      as M = m l / m 2 ,weobtainfromequations(l)and(2)
formulations of the two-body collision prnhlem           for the ve!ocities jus? after !he impact:
(Zukas 1982, Kane and Levinson 1985, Brach
 1984). A simple experiment to verify the theoreti-                        M-e       I +e
                                                                    vi=-                                     (3)
cal predictions of the model is described. This                            I + M ul+  1+M &
experiment leads to direct estimates of the coeffi-
cients of restitution and friction and illustrates the
                                                                             l+e         1-eM
transition of rolling spheres from pure rolling to a                 v2 = M-     U,+-             u2.        (4)
combination of rolling and sliding.                                          I+M         1+M

                                                            The frictional forces must cause a change in the
Theory
                                                         angular velocities of the spheres, from their initial
Impact of rolling spheres. Let us consider two           values, uj/R., to the values ojafter the impact,
spheres, labelled 1 and 2, of equal radius, Rb, that     which can be deduced from the integration of the
collide while rolling along a horizontal rectangular     equation 4 doj= *pRgnj dv,, in which Ij= 2mjR;/5
track, with initial velocities U, (j=l,2). At impact,    represents the momen! of inertia of each sphere
each sphere is assumed to exert an impulsive force       (j=1,2) and p the coefficient of sliding friction
on the other at the point of contact, which can be       between them, which is also regarded as a constant
                                                         characteristic of the materials, and independent of
                                                          velocity. Re is the effective radius of each sphere,
Elena Cssasits ana Antonlo D m h e c h are professors     defined as the distance from its centre to the plane
of Physics at tne InstttLto de Bacn llerato de Bunol.
Valenc a Spain They both nave partc.lar interest In
                                                          of contact with the track (see figure 2), that can
the teacn ng oi P h p c s and Astronomy. and have        leasily be calculated from the radius, Rb, and the
Several PLDbcabonS in thm held                            groove width, a, as R . = [ R ~ - ( O / ~ ) ~ I ~ ' ~ .

MJ3 ? ' ^ I *   3316urMYI350T 1-1    OPk c ,"?;.IJ
                            I                                                                                                I
                                                                                                          ":YR.    .;"Re
                                        ",in.         +/Re            U,
                                                                                       W2

Figure 1. Schematic
diagrams illustrating the
frontal impact of rolling
spheres.

                                                                sions depends on the direction of the frictional
                                                                force, given, in turn, by the sign of vJ- w,R..
                                                                   By integration of these equations we can obtain
                                                                the velocities of the spheres at a time 1, corres-
                                                                ponding to a combination of rolling and sliding
                                                                motions. The pure rolling motion is reached when
                                                                 v,=oj%; therefore, the values of the velocities, vi",
                                                                will be (introducing the ratio R=R,/Rb)

                                                          i
Figure 2. Experimental arrangement and cross-
sectional view of the sphere on the track.
                                                                           + -25R - (II+e
  Thus. we can obtain
                                                                                      R+p)Uz
                                                                                      +M                 1 (I+%Rz)-I       (7)

Since w,# vJ/R. it is obvious that, in general, the                        X   (I   + 5hR2)-   I

motion of the spheres after impact will be a combi-
nation of rolling and sliding.                                  at times after the impact Iz= l * ( l - 5pR/2)/p; and
   From the above equations, the case in which one              I,=    l*M(I + 5pR/2)/p\, where
of the spheres is initially at rest can be described by
making U , (or u2) equal to zero; it is interesting to                              ,*= R(I + e/l + M)(u, - uz)            (9)
note that for an elastic collision (e= I ) between                                                 g(l + % R 2 )
spheres ofequal masses (M= I), equations ( I ) and                  Notice that the coefficients of friction between
(2) predict, respectively, v,=O and v2=uI, i.e., the            the spheres and the track are absent from equations
balls interchange their velocities, as is frequently            ( 5 ) and (6). which can he obtained directly by inte-
cited in general textbooks. The impact of a rolling             gration of 1, d o j = -Rem,; dv,. It should be noted
sphere against a vertical rigid surface is described            that in this treatment we have neglected the roll-
by putting the ml/m2ratio to zero; as expected, the             ing friction terms required in more detailed
model predicts that v, = -ill for an elastic collision          approaches to the problem (Domenech et a/1987).
with a rigid harrier.

                                                                Experimentel procedure
Motion of the spheres after the impact. After the
impact, the frictional forces acting between the                Verification of the model has the intrinsic difficulty
balls and the track cause changes in the linear and             associated with the experimental determination of
angular velocities given respectively by mj dvj/dl=             the velocities, requiring relatively complicated
 &p,!mjg(Rh/&) and ti doj/dt= + p , ! R c J g ( R h / R e ) ,   equipment. To overcome this difficulty we can
where p; denotes the coefficient of friction of the             study the case in which one sphere collides with
j-sphere with the track. The sign in these expres-              the second sphere (initially) at rest. The bails

                                                                                                                           107
collide on a rectangular track placed on a labora-       remains practically constant. Deceleration due to
tory bench, with the lower end of the track flush        rolling friction and air resistance are negligible
with the edge of the bench. After moving off the         given our experimental conditions.
track the balls fell through the air, finally striking
the floor at a horizontal distance x and a vertical
distancey from the end of the track.                     Results and dlscusslon
   The points of impact of the balls with the floor
                                                         Aluminium, brass and steel spheres of 2.50cm
can be determined using carbon paper. Neglecting
                                                         diameter were employed in collisions on an alu-
air resistance, the trajectory is a parabola of form
y=gg/2$, and so the velocity of the sphere at the        minium track with groove width l.00cm. The
                                                         velocity of the incident ball was adjusted to
end of the track can be calculated from the
distances x and y.                                       0.75f0.10m s-' by using a coupled slanted track.
                                                         The end of the horizontal track was placed at a
   For simplicity, we can obtain the ratios v , / u l    height of 75 cm above the floor. The data were
and v2/uI directly from measurements of the hori-        obtained by varying the distance d and measuring
zontal distances covered by ball 1 without impact
                                                         the horizontal distances xo,xlr x,, covered by the
(xo) and by the balls 1 and 2 after the impact
                                                         spheres. Experiments were repeated five times in
(xI,x2). Obviously, the velocity of the incident
                                                         order to obtain the xj distances; in all cases, the
sphereat impact, uI, must beconstant; this require-
                                                         dispersion of the xi values was less than 2%.
ment is accomplished by using a slanted auxiliary
                                                            The experimental results agreed satisfactorily
track placed over the horizontal grooved track.
                                                         with the proposed model under our experimental
   When the experiment was carried out, the stu-         conditions. In figure 3 we have plotted the values
dents found a relatively surprising result: the ratios   of xj/xo in terms of the values of dj for the col-
 of the velocities depended on the location of the
                                                         lisions between steel (s), brass (b) and aluminium
 point of impact of the spheres with respect to the
                                                         (a) spheres, in all c a m with M = l . As can be
 end of the track (see figure 2). This fact can be
                                                         observed, the ratio xl/xo remains practically con-
 explained in terms of the transition from the initial   stant while the ratio x2/xo decreases when the
 rolling and sliding motion of the spheres to the
                                                         distance d2 increases, until an abrupt change
 pure rolling motion due to friction with the track.     occurs for a distance d,: when pure rolling motion
 Thus, the ratios of the velocities must vary from       commences.
                   v,/ul = (M-e)/(l+ M )          (10)
                   vz/ul = M(1 + e)/(1 + M )      (11)
immediately after the impact to                          Figure 3. Plots of the experimental values of x,/%
                                                         v e r s ~ sthe distances d. for the ColllSlOnS 01 donerent
                                                         pairs o! spheres

             ( 1 - 2 FR l + M + -2R -)I + M
                   5     I+e     5 ,M-e
V ; ~ / U=
         I        -    ~

                                                  (12)
             x ( I +?4R2)-'

corresponding to the pure rolling motion. Equa-
tions (IO) and (1 l ) imply that the distances, d,, of
the spheres from the end of the track are zero.
When the distance d; is larger than a given limiting
value, d), pure rolling motion obtains, and the
velocities of the spheres will be described by equa-
tions (12) and (13). For intermediate distances
(0 < di<)!,d the square of the velocities must be
linearly dependent on the distanced,, i.e.
           vj(d;)= vj(d,= O)* 2pt;gd,/R.         (14)
  Once pure rolling motion has been reached                         0            10             20       30
(dj> d)) the velocity of the spheres along the track                                    4, I"

1ea
                Table 1. Coefficients of restitution and friction determined for several pairs of
                soheres.

                Moferiols (1-2)           M            e             )I              I4
                aluminium-aluminium       I .OO        0.69 ~k0.02   0. I7 +O.M      0.17 f0.03
                brass-brass               1.00         0.722Z0.02    0.16&0.04       0.16*0.03
                steel-steel               1.00         0.9510.02     O.ll+O.O3       0.15*0.03
                brass-steel               1.05         0.7210.02     0.14+0.04       0.15*0.03
                brass-aluminium           3.16         0.61*0.02     0.1210.03       0.15*0.03
                steel-aluminium           3.01         0.552Z0.02    0.1410.03       0.16+0.03

                                                               coefficients of restitution and friction calculated
                                                               for several pairs of materials are listed in table I .
                                                                 The students can compare the experimental
                                                               results with successive theoretical formulations
                                                               of the problem. Thus, in a first step, the solution
                                                               of the equations of the frontal elastic collisions
                                                               without frictional effects can be obtained. In a
                                                               second approach, the inelasticity of the impact is
                                                               included, yielding a satisfactory description of the
                                                               velocities immediately after the impact. Finally,
                                                               frictional effects between the spheres and in the
                                                               sphere-track contact are incorporated into the
                                                               model to account for the observed results both
                                                               qualitatively and quantitatively.

        0       10                30              50           Concludlng remarks
                              d , Lml
                                                               The study of collisions exemplifies one of the most
FlgureQ. Graphical representation of (xC/&)' versus            significant aspects of the scientific methodology:
4 for t h e collisionsof brass-aluminium (A),                  the introduction of successive approaches to a
steel-aluminium (8)and brass-steel (C) spheres.
                                                               general model to obtain progressive improvements
                                                               in the description of a particular problem.
                                                                  The present formulation can be considered as a
                                                               plausible description of the frontal impact of
   As shown in figure 4, ( X ~ / X vanes
                                   ~ ) ~ linearly with
                                                               rolling spheres, and allows a simple mechanics
d2, for small values of this distance, allowing e to           experiment illustrating the classical laws of impact
be obtained from the intercept using equation (1 1 )           and friction, yielding rapid estimates of the coeffi-
and (1; from the slope using equation (14) in the              cients of restitution and friction. In addition, the
corresponding least-squares adjustment.                        transition of a rolling sphere from pure rolling to a
   For distances dz>dk, the quotient xJx0 remains              combination of rating and sliding can also be
practically constant, as can be seen also from                 studied.
figures 3 and 4. This limiting value of x2/xopermits
an estimate to be made of the coefficient of friction
between the spheres, inserting into equation (13)              References
the value of e previously calculated.
   For ball 1, only the rolling motion is recorded,            Brach R M 1984 J. Appl. Mech. 51 I 6 4
as shown in figure 3. The experimental values of               Domenech A, Domenech M T and Cebdn J 1987
X ~ X Oare in excellent agreement with those calcu-              Am. J . Phys. 55 231
                                                               Goldsmith W 19M)lmpucf(London: Arnold)
lated by substituting the above values of p and e              Kane T R and Levinson D A 1985 Dynomics: Theory
into equation (12). This fact provides further sup-              and Applicofions(New York: McGraw-Hill)
port for the validity of the model. The values of the          Zukas J A 1982 Impocl Dynamics (New York Wiley)

                                                                                                                189
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/frozen_proposition_shot.pdf
title: Frozen Proposition Shot
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
“Frozen Proposition Shot”                                                    ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    In a recent YouTube video (NV L.61), I demonstrate the interesting frozen-ball proposition shot shown in
Image 1, where the goal is to pocket the 8 in the far corner. I learned it from Ed Liddawi at the recent PBIA/ACS
Certified Instructors Summit in Quincy, IL. He learned the shot from "Mean" Gene Rickle, who called it the
"impossible shot." It is actually impossible to miss if you know how to hit it!

                                      Image 1 Frozen proposition shot

     The basic proposition is: I bet you can’t pocket the 8 ball in the corner for the win, with cue ball (CB) in
hand. The balls are frozen a ball off the center of the foot rail, and the kiss or tangent line of the 8 off the 13
heads well above the corner pocket. You can first give your “mark” or “fish” a bunch of tries at attempting to
pocket the ball. As demonstrated in the video, they might try to throw the 8 in with sidespin, either from the
side, or from above. That doesn’t work. They might also try a full hit or an angled hit. Those might not work
either. They might try faster speed from a different angle or an angled cut shot. Those might not work either.
If they can’t pocket the ball, which will often be the case, you then bet you can make the 8 on the first try.

      If you know Bob Jewett’s 10-times-fuller system, that I covered in another recent video (NV L.60), the shot
is a “piece of cake.” As shown in Image 2, you just need to aim to hit the 8 full along a line that heads 1/10 of
the way from the ball line to the pocket. See the video for more info and lots of examples. With an accurate
hit, the 8 pushes forward of the kiss line enough to reach the pocket. A little backspin on the CB can help it go
forward even more.

Billiards Digest                                      1                                                January 2025
                                      Image 2 10-times-fuller system

    You can also bet you can make the same shot from the seemingly more-difficult CB position shown in
Image 3. Many people will think this is impossible. You can have your “fish” or “mark” try it first. The same
ghost-ball aim point as in Image 2 (or slightly thinner) works here too. You can then bet you can even make
the 8 in the same corner from the seemingly impossible position shown in Image 4. That shot also works with
the same aim point. In fact, as shown in the video, the same 10-times-fuller ghost ball aim point works over a
very wide range of angles.

                                     Image 3 Challenging CB position

Billiards Digest                                    2                                              January 2025
                                 Image 4 Seemingly impossible CB position

     The video also demonstrates top and bottom spin effects. Topspin on the CB transfers slight backspin to
the 8, which sends it less forward. And bottom spin on the CB transfers slight topspin to the 8, helping it go
more forward. With a thinner cut on the 8 from a bigger angle, top and bottom spin have less effect, but there
is still a difference.

     The video also looks at margins for error with both full and thin hits on the 8. The margin for error is much
larger with the thin hit shown in Image 3. In other words, it is much easier to make the shot from this position
as compared with the full-hit CB position shown in Image 2. This is probably due to the CB continuing to push
forward as it slides across the 8 during contact. Watch NV L.61 to see a clear illustration of this using a head-
mounted GoPro camera, which shows the shooter’s perspective. So if you are propositioning someone, the
thin-hit CB position (Image 3) is the best place from which to shoot. Be sure to also use backspin to help.

     Another possible proposition bet for the same ball layout is: With ball in hand, I bet I can pocket the 8 with
5 other totally different types of shots. How many can you come up with? In the video, I came up with a dozen
totally different shots. That is probably more than you thought might be possible. I was certainly surprised.
Check out the video if you want to see the dozen options. Here’s a list of the shots:
     1 – fuller square hit with SIT assist.
     2 – double-kiss herd shot.
     3 – kick with a timed kiss.
     4 – push-through kiss bank.
     5 – long kiss-back shot.
     6 – cross-side bank.
     7 – two-rail Z-bank to the side.
     8 – kiss two-times-across bank.
     9 – kiss two-times across timed-kiss bank.
     10 – hop kick carom.
     11 – hop skip timed carom.
     12 – hop skim bank with the timed carom.

    Be sure to watch and try the shots in online video NV L.61. It demonstrates everything described above,
plus a lot more. I hope some of the proposition bets presented help you win a little cash someday.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Billiards Digest                                      3                                                January 2025
                   NV L.60 – Useful Direction Control with Small-Gap and Frozen-Ball Kiss Shots
   normal video
                   NV L.61 – Frozen Double Kiss PROPOSITION BAR BET Shots with GoPro POV

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                         4                                                January 2025
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/fundamentals_part_i_mofudat.pdf
title: Fundamentals - Part I: MOFUDAT
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Fundamentals - Part I: MOFUDAT”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. See the website for details.

     Well, it is the start of league season, so it’s time to brush up on some important
fundamentals. Over the next few months, I’ll present information and drills focusing on important
skills and principles related to the stroke, aiming, and cue ball control.

     Diagram 1 shows what I call the pool-skills development pyramid or Pyramid of Progress.
The foundation layers of the pyramid (A through D) represent successive levels of competencies
required to become a good pool player. There is a natural progression of ability from the lower
layer to the top. The pyramid illustrates the importance of building and reinforcing your level of
ability from the bottom up, starting with fundamentals. The inspiration for the pyramid comes
from Maslow’s “Hierarchy of Needs,” an important principle from the world of psychology. The
principle states that people cannot reach their full potential unless they first meet their
physiological needs (food, water, air, shelter), then safety needs (security, freedom from fear),
then belonging needs (friends, family, love), and then esteem needs (self respect, reputation). If
a lower level need is not met, it is difficult, if not impossible, to satisfy higher level needs. With
the pool pyramid, you cannot reach your maximum competitive ability unless you first develop
and master the lower level fundamentals.

                                        Maximum
                                       Competitive
                     mortar:             Ability
                   mental focus,
                                                          foundation layers:
                    discipline,
                     practice,                       D: Shot Making
                     and fun
                                                       C: Position Play and Strategy
                                                          B: Executing Basic Shots
                                                               A: Fundamentals

                                   Diagram 1 Pyramid of Progress

    The mortar in Diagram 1, required to build the pyramid and hold it together, represents the
mental focus, discipline, practice, and fun that is required to develop and maintain your pool
game. Continual practice, self-analysis, and improvement are required throughout the entire
development and maintenance process. Confidence and intuition can come only with a great
deal of practice and experience. It is also important to enjoy the game and have fun. If you do
not have fun with the game, you will not have a desire to improve.

    I want to stress the importance of building and strengthening the “pyramid” from the bottom
up. You should spend much of your practice time working on fundamentals, especially if you are
a beginner or intermediate player. This requires discipline, but there is a payoff – you will develop
better and faster! Your “shot making” will also become more reliable. If your fundamentals are
not solid, you will not be able to develop the higher-level skills as easily.

Billiards Digest                                                                       September, 2008
    Even if you are a skilled and experienced player, you should still continue to work on and
maintain solid fundamentals. There are many good players who could be much better if they had
stronger fundamentals and if they had a better understanding of basic principles of pool. Many
good players rely strictly on experience and do not truly understand pool principles. They have
seen so many different shots, they often intuitively know what to do; but if they were armed with
an understanding of principles, they could better plan many shots that would be difficult to
execute relying strictly on experience and intuition. I do not want to undervalue the importance of
experience and intuition – they are absolutely essential to be a great player. However,
understanding can be extremely valuable in helping to accelerate your learning and intuition-
building process.

     Diagram 2 shows what I call the Rack of Skills that lists important pool elements and skills
corresponding to the pyramid levels shown in Diagram 1. As with the pyramid, the rack of balls
has five levels, each with specific topics. Both Diagrams 1 and 2 are from my book: “The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards.” The diagrams illustrate how the book is organized,
breaking down each pyramid layer into specific required skills.

                                              be confident
                                              and win often

                             bank        speed                                 advanced
                             shots       control                              techniques

                                                           1
                              spin and                                             defensive
                               English                 2        3                    play
                    aiming                                 5        6
                                                                                                pocket
                                                  4
                   methods                                                                     selection
                                              7        8        9        10
                              ball                                                       shot
                             paths       11       12       13       14        15
                                                                                       planning

                                stick
                               and tip                 bridge                      stroke

                                          grip                       stance

                                     Diagram 2 Rack of Skills

    The stroke is by far the most important building block of a successful pool game. Your stroke
must be reliable, accurate, and consistent to have a solid game. It is appropriate that the stroke
is a cornerstone of the skills pyramid (see Diagram 2). In the May ’08 issue, Mason King and I
presented a “Stroke Tune-up” coaching bonus feature to cover stroke “best practices” in detail.
The tune-up article, along with useful summaries and check sheets for all fundamentals (stick, tip,
grip, bridge, stance, and stroke) can be found in the “Instructor and Student Resources” section
of my website. It is always best to meet with a qualified and experienced instructor to help you
diagnose and eliminate flaws in your fundamentals; but the checklists might help you spot some
things, especially if you have some mirrors and/or a video camera handy.

    Two things about the stroke that often cause debate is whether or not you should use a pure
pendulum stroke, where the elbow remains still, and whether or not you should pause at the end
of your final back-swing before your final forward stroke. I don’t want to get into these issues
here, because it would take too many pages. Most instructors do recommend a non-elbow-drop
pendulum swing and a pause (even if only very slight) before the final forward stroke. If you want
to read more about these topics, see the “stroke” section in the “Answers to Frequently Asked

Billiards Digest                                                                                           September, 2008
Questions” on my website. Allison Fisher once told me the one change she made to her game
that had the biggest positive impact, compared to any other change she has ever made, was
adding a distinct and deliberate pause before her final forward stroke. It certainly seems to works
for her. Now let’s look at a drill that might help you identify and fix certain problems with your
stroke.

     Diagram 3 shows what I call MOFUDAT: The MOst Famous and Useful Drill of All Time.
This is a very popular drill with instructors and instructional authors. Here are the drill
instructions:

          1. Use a medium-speed, above-center hit to send the striped ball straight up-table and
             back. Align the stripe with the shot direction before shooting.

          2. Observe any wobble in the stripe. This indicates an off-center hit.

          3. Stay down in your follow-through position and observe how close the ball returns to
             the cue tip. A close return indicates good aim and alignment and an accurate stroke.

          4. Shoot the shot ten times, keeping track of how many attempts are good (very little or
             no wobble, and ball return close to the tip).

          5. Repeat steps 1-4 with center-ball and below-center tip placements.

          6. Which cue tip position results in the best consistency and accuracy?

The MOFUDAT drill is an excellent test of your aim, alignment, cue tip placement accuracy, and
stroke consistency. I’ve added the balls on the rail to provide a clear target and to provide a
changeable difficulty level (by narrowing the gap). If the stripe doesn’t remain vertical and the ball
doesn’t come back to your tip, then you have room for improvement. One-page summaries of
MOFUDAT and many other drills can be viewed and printed from the “Instructor and Student
Resources” section of my website. Remember, practice makes perfect!

                                                             optional balls with gap
                                fast                          to make target clear
                                medium
                                slow

                                                                                          1

                                                                                          2

                   Diagram 3 Most Famous and Useful Drill of All Time (MOFUDAT)

Billiards Digest                                                                       September, 2008
    Step 6 above implies your consistency and accuracy might be different with different tip
placements on the vertical centerline. Online video HSV B.10 demonstrates the effects of above
and below center hits and explains some of the reasons why an above-center hit seems to
provide the best success with the drill. Here’s a summary of some of the reasons why:
      •     The cue can be more level (less elevated) for an above center hit, with the same
            clearance between the cue and the rail. This will reduce the amount of swerve (cue ball
            curve) if the cue ball is hit unintentionally off center.
      •     The slowing drag effect of a below-center hit, with unintentional English, increases the
            effective sidespin off the rail. The drag action slows the ball’s speed more than with a roll
            shot, but the sidespin doesn’t wear off any faster. With the same spin and less speed,
            the rebound angle off the rail will be larger for the drag shot.
      •     It might be easier for some people to position the tip on the cue ball centerline when the
            tip is closer to the top edge of the ball, where there is clearer alignment with the top of the
            tip and the top of the ball (although, this reason might be debatable).

                   HSV B.10 – MOFUDAT stroke drill follow and draw effects
high-speed video

      One thing is obvious in HSV B.10: with a below center hit, it is very difficult to maintain the
stripe orientation during the shot. Some people think this is because the ball’s motion easily gets
disturbed due to skid (instead of roll), but this is not the case. The reason is the drag action of the
shot creates stun, before roll develops. While the ball has close to no bottom-spin or topspin (i.e.,
it is close to stun), even a slight amount of English (sidespin) can reorient the stripe. This doesn’t
happen with an above center hit because the stripe is constantly rolling, not giving the English
enough time to turn the stripe off course in any one direction. The stripe does wobble when
English is used with a rolling shot, but the stripe doesn’t totally tumble as it does with a below-
center hit with even the slightest touch of English. Please watch the video so you can see all of
this in super slow motion.

    Well, I hope you try out the MOFUDAT drill and use some of the check-sheets on my website
to try to improve your pyramid foundation. Next month we will look at some basic aiming
methods and drills that might be helpful if you sometimes have less than perfect aim.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •     If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access
            them online at billiards.colostate.edu.
      •     I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, impact
            line, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
            come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
            glossary in the “Instructor and Student Resources” section of my website.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                            September, 2008
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/fundamentals_part_ii_aiming.pdf
title: Fundamentals - Part II: Aiming
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Fundamentals - Part II: Aiming”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. See the website for details.

    This is the second article in a series on fundamentals. Last month, I presented some
background information and touched on the stroke and a useful stroke drill. This month, the
focus is on aiming. “Aiming systems” is probably one of the most controversial and emotional
topics in pool, so I will just stick to the basics. Recently, the Internet forums have been beehives
of activity (more like hornet nests) with various debates (more like “ruthless wars”) concerning
various aiming “systems.” If you are interested, a lot more information and discussion concerning
aiming system concepts can be found under “aiming” in the FAQ section of my website.

      Diagram 1 illustrates basic terminology concerning aiming. To send the object ball (OB) in
the target direction, the cue ball (CB) must be delivered to the imaginary ghost ball (GB) target to
create the necessary contact point (CP) between the CB and OB. At contact, the line connecting
the CB and OB centers is called the impact line or “line of centers.” Probably the most basic and
useful “aiming system,” especially for a beginner, is the GB aiming system. To aim a shot, you
first align your sight with the OB and the desired target to determine the required CP and impact
line. Then you align your sight with the CB and the center of the imaginary GB target, along the
necessary aiming line. Then , with a reliable stroke, you deliver the CB to the GB target. Note
that the CB aiming line does not pass through the CP between the CB and OB. Note also that
the basic GB system does not take into account OB throw (see my past articles on this topic);
however, if the GB position if shifted to account for throw, then everything else still applies.

                                 impact line           ghost ball
                            ("line of centers")          center
                                                     (aiming point)

                                                                      aiming
                                                                        line
                           CB                           OB

                                 contact point
                                                                target
                                                               direction

                            Diagram 1 Aiming line and contact point

    Inexperienced players, and sometimes experienced players, often undercut cut shots (i.e.,
the shots are hit too full). One reason is the player is not accounting for collision-induced throw
(see my September ’06 article for more info). Another reason is illustrated in Diagram 2. A
novice player is often tempted to aim at the required CP instead of the imaginary GB center. This
results in a different actual CP. The end result is too small of a cut angle (i.e., the ball is hit too

Billiards Digest                                                                          October, 2008
full), and the shot is missed. In fact, the OB doesn’t even come close to the pocket. You must
aim at the imaginary GB center (adjusted for throw if necessary), not the desired CP. This
example demonstrates, in dramatic fashion, how sensitive a pool shot can be to relatively small
changes in aim.

                             required
                            impact line
                                                                 actual
                     actual                     required         aiming
                   impact line                   contact           line
                                                  point

                                                                           the actual
                                                                            cut angle
                                                                          is too small
                                       actual
                                      contact
                                       point                           required
                                                                       cut angle
                                                           desired
                                                            target
                                                           direction
             the cue ball is incorrectly aimed at
         the required contact point (instead of the
           required ghost ball center) resulting in
               a different actual contact point

                                   Diagram 2 Undercutting a cut shot

    You can practice the GB technique and develop your visualization and aiming skills by having
someone place a spare ball at the desired GB location while you are aiming your shot. Diagram
3 and NV 3.1 show an example of how this works. When your aim is established, have the
person remove the GB, and try to imagine the GB in its place along with the resulting CP. Do this
several times (placing the ball and taking it away) with different cut angles and directions to help
develop your GB perception abilities. The balls used in Diagram 3 are called Elephant Practice
Balls, but regular striped balls can be used instead. The stripes help you visualize the aiming line
and impact line directions, and the ball number (or the red circle of the Elephant ball) can be used
to help visualize the CP.

Billiards Digest                                                                         October, 2008
      object
       ball                                                                               aiming
                                                                                            line

       ghost
        ball
       target

       impact
         line
                                 a) ghost ball in place (impact line view)
               aiming                                contact
                 line                                 point

                                                  impact
                                                    line

      b) ghost ball in place (aiming line view)            c) ghost ball removed (aiming line view)

                                Diagram 3 Ghost ball aiming method

                   NV 3.1 – Practicing contact point and ghost ball visualization
normal video

     Diagram 4 and NV 3.2 show how you can use the cue to help visualize the impact, tangent,
and aiming lines for a cut shot. You first place the cue over the OB in the direction of your target
to define the impact line (see NV 3.2). The tangent line will be perpendicular to this line. The cue
can also help you visualize the GB target location for the CB. The tip of the cue is placed on the
table at the center of the imaginary GB target and the cue is pivoted about this point until it is in
line with the CB. This defines the aiming line for your stroke.

Billiards Digest                                                                            October, 2008
                                                           the cue is first placed along
                                                      the impact line with the cue tip at the
                                                          center of the ghost ball target

                         the cue is
                    pivoted about the
               cue tip from the impact line
               to the cue ball to define the
                   required aiming line

                                                    ghost ball
                                                      target
                                                                          impact
                                                                            line

                       Diagram 4 Using the cue to help visualize the aiming line

                    NV 3.2 – Using the cue to help visualize the impact and aiming lines
normal video

    Before addressing the ball and settling into your stance, an upright look helps you visualize
the GB and see the angle of the shot before dropping your eye level into the final stance (see NV
3.3). From an upright position, with the cue aligned with the aiming line and your head in the
aiming plane, gradually lower your upper body and head into the stance, keeping your head and
gaze in the aiming plane. While lowering, it helps to move your eyes up and down, between the
GB target and the cue, to help maintain the correct aiming plane.

                    NV 3.3 – Addressing the ball and taking your stance
normal video

     As you develop your aiming skills and experience-based intuition, you will learn to “see the
angles” and might not need to visualize the impact line and GB target; but, when learning, it helps
to methodically line up and aim a shot, using your intuition as a check and reinforcement. I
personally use a combination of straight intuition (just "seeing the angle"), GB aiming, and CP
visualization.       Based      on    an    article    written about    how     pros     aim   (see
www.sfbilliards.com/PnB_aiming.pdf), it seems many pros take a similar approach; although, the
article is not the result of a rigorous scientific study. The pros use all of the visual information
available to them (CP, GB, impact line), and they just “see” the angle of the shot. And when a
shot requires English, they usually intuitively compensate for squirt, swerve, and throw. If you
want to know more about squirt, swerve, and throw compensation, see the pertinent link under
“aiming” in the FAQ section of my website.

    Some people seem to think they have magical aiming systems that can help somebody shoot
better overnight. I think this is a nice dream, but not a practical reality. Aiming is tough because

Billiards Digest                                                                            October, 2008
it involves 3D visualization, visual perception, and physical and visual alignment. One must also
compensate for cut-induced throw when no English is used, and squirt, swerve, and throw when
English is used. If precise aiming were simple, pool would be a much easier (and much less fun)
game. If somebody claims he or she has a magical system that will work for all shots without
special compensation, they are trying to sell you religion, not solid technique. Having said that,
any "system" that helps a person focus on aim and alignment consistently and with concentration
will be beneficial to many people (especially people who currently don't focus well or long
enough), even if the system isn’t perfect.

    Concerning many of the limited-lines-of-aim “aiming systems” people have proposed, the OB
can only go in N different directions with only N lines of aim. So if somebody claims a system
with only a few lines of aim can be used to pocket any shot, they are not telling you the whole
story. With only a few lines of aim (e.g., the fractional-ball or center-to-edge systems), intuitive
compensation based on lots of experience and practice must be part of the aiming and aligning
process. In TP A.13, I work through some math and geometry that shows how many lines of aim
are required for different types of shots. For those not interested in mathematical details, here
are some of the highlights for large (5 1/4”) pockets:
      •      To be able to pocket an OB into a pocket about 3 feet away, with an average angle to the
             pocket, and for any cut angle, the required number of aiming lines is about 19!
      •      If you consider cut shots only within a typical range (e.g., 7.5 to 52.5 degrees), and use
             only three equally spaced lines of aim (e.g., with a fractional-ball aiming system):
                   o   If the OB is less than a foot from the pocket, every shot can be pocketed with the
                       three lines of aim.
                   o   If the OB is more than two feet from the pocket, less than 50% of all cut shots in
                       the typical range can be pocketed with only three lines of aim.

With “tighter” pockets, the situation is much worse: even more lines of aim are required.

                       TP A.13 – Number of lines of aim required for different types of shots
technical proof

    Well, I hope you are enjoying and benefiting from my series of articles on fundamentals. If
you want to read more about aiming systems and concepts, I have much more info under
“aiming” in the FAQ section of my website. Next month, we will look at important issues related to
CB control.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •      If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access
             them online at billiards.colostate.edu.
      •      I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, impact
             line, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
             come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
             glossary in the “Instructor and Student Resources” section of my website.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                October, 2008
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/fundamentals_part_iii_dam_aiming_system.pdf
title: Fundamentals - Part III: The DAM Aiming System
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Fundamentals - Part III: The DAM Aiming System”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. See the website for details.

    This is the third article in a series on fundamentals. In the last two months, I’ve covered the
stroke and basic aiming. This month, I want to explore aiming systems a bit more. First, I have a
very exciting announcement:

          I have recently developed an amazing new aiming system called DAM (“Dave’s Aiming
     Method”) that will revolutionize pool playing around the world. DAM is the best and most
     complete aiming system that has ever been devised. The DAM system will radically improve
     the shot-making abilities of those who spend the time to learn it. DAM will eventually become
     the "aiming standard" and will significantly accelerate your learning curve. There are those
     who will eventually learn the system, and there are those who will not and be beaten by those
     who do. I make almost every shot with this system ... I rarely miss. Isn't that proof of how
     good it is? Don't you want to be as good as me? If you want to master the DAM system, you
     must visit me in person and pay outrageous sums of money to learn all of the required
     intricacies. If you don't believe me or if you doubt the validity of my system, you will be
     persecuted and ridiculed by all of my followers.

    Well, I hope you know I was being facetious with my “announcement.” I was just trying to get
your attention. Believe it or not, it is not uncommon to hear sometimes-exaggerated claims like
these when people are trying to promote their “aiming system.” Here are some examples of other
outrageous statements I’ve actually heard and read over the years about basic cut shot “aiming
systems:”

          •        Many of the pros use my system. If you ask a pro and he tells you otherwise, it is
                   because he doesn’t want you to know his secrets.

          •        Don’t tell us why it doesn’t work. Tell us how it does work … because it does! Stop
                   being so negative.

          •        You can’t use 2D diagrams to illustrate how the system works, and it can’t be
                   explained with the written word … you can learn it only in person.

          •        Cut-induced throw makes all shots work with only a few lines of aim.

          •        It works every time for every shot, regardless of the distance between the balls, and
                   regardless of the angle and distance to the pocket. Just pivot, and the ball goes in.

          •        There are six pockets on the table so you only need six lines of aim.

          •        My system only requires N (e.g., 3 or 4 or 5 or 6) lines of aim.

    Have you heard some of these statements before? I sure have. Some people seem to think
an “aiming system” (for basic cut shots) can help somebody play better overnight. I think this is a
nice dream, but it is not a practical reality. Aiming is tough because it involves 3D visualization,
visual perception, and physical and visual alignment. One must also compensate for cut-induced

Billiards Digest                                                                           November, 2008
throw when no English is used, and squirt, swerve, and throw when English is used. And as we
know from all of my past articles on throw effects, the amount of throw depends on shot speed,
cut angle, the type and amount of English, how much top or bottom spin the cue ball (CB) has at
object ball (OB) contact, ball conditions, etc. If precise aiming were simple, pool would be a
much easier (and much less fun) game. If somebody claims he or she has a limited-lines-of-aim
system that will work for all or most shots, without any compensation, I would recommend you be
a little suspicious. Having said that, any "system" that helps a person focus on aim and alignment
consistently and with concentration will be beneficial to many people (especially people who
currently don't focus well or long enough), even if the system isn’t perfect.

    Concerning the limited-lines-of-aim “systems” people have proposed over the years, the OB
can only go in only N different directions with only N lines of aim. So if somebody claims a
system with only a few lines of aim can be used to pocket any or most shots, they are not telling
you the whole story. With only a few lines of aim, intuitive compensation based on lots of
experience and practice must be part of the aiming and aligning process to use the system
successfully. In TP A.13, I work through some math and geometry that shows how many lines of
aim are required for different types of shots. For those not interested in mathematical details,
here are some of the highlights for large (5 1/4”) pockets:
      •      To be able to pocket an OB into a pocket about 3 feet away, with any cut angle, the
             required number of aiming lines is about 19!
      •      If you consider cut shots only within a typical range (e.g., 7.5 to 52.5 degrees), and use
             only three equally spaced lines of aim (e.g., with a fractional-ball aiming system):
                   o   If the OB is less than a foot from the pocket, every shot can be pocketed with the
                       three lines of aim.
                   o   If the OB is more than two feet from the pocket, less than 50% of all cut shots in
                       the typical range can be pocketed with only three lines of aim.

With “tighter” pockets, the situation is much worse (i.e., even more lines of aim are required).

                       TP A.13 – Number of lines of aim required for different types of shots
technical proof

     Diagrams 1 and 2 illustrate some basic concepts important to understanding the limitations of
some aiming systems. Diagram 1 shows what I call a parallel shift of the same line of aim.
Shots “A,” “B,” and “C” all have the same line of aim. In other words, the eventual contact point
on the CB is aimed at the same point on each OB. Therefore the cut angle is the same for each
shot. The point of the diagram is: If an aiming system has a method to achieve a line of aim
based on the relative position of the CB and OB, not taking into consideration the angle to the
pocket, the system-generated aim will result in a well-defined cut angle that won’t work for every
shot. Only shot “A” in the diagram will result in pocketing the ball. If the same line of aim is used
for shots “B” and “C,” the ball will not be pocketed. Even if the balls are only shifted a small
distance from position “A” to position “D,” the ball will not be pocketed. So the next time
somebody proposes a system to you, show them this diagram and ask them how to aim shot “A.”
Then ask them how to aim the shot if the balls are in position “D” instead (or even closer to “A”).
If they tell you the aim is the same, then their system is not complete. To make the large number
of shots possible between positions “A” and “C,” shifting the balls together as shown, you need a
large number of lines of aim, or you need a method to compensate your aim between a small
number of lines of aim. There is no way around this!

Billiards Digest                                                                            November, 2008
                                     D
                            A                   B                   C

                   The required line of aim is different for every shot between “A” and “C”

                           Diagram 1 Parallel shift of same “line of aim”

     Diagram 2 shows the effects of ball separation distance on an aim-and-pivot system. Some
systems establish an initial cue line using ball-hit fractions or some other method. For example,
see the line in the diagram going through the same fraction of both the CB and the OBs. It’s not
important for now how the line is established. Various systems have various ways of establishing
lines like this. What is important is that the line is exactly the same for all three shots: “A,” “B,”
and “C.” The next step in many systems is to pivot the cue (with the body or with the back hand)
to bring the cue in line with the center of the CB. Often, the system proponents say this
technique will work for a wide range of shots. It turns out this is true in certain situations. For
example, if the pocket happened to be at position “a,” both shots “A” and “B” would be pocketed
with the same aim. Likewise, if the pocket happened to be at position “b,” the same aiming
procedure would work for both shots “A” and “C.” Finally, if the pocket were at position “c,” both
shots “B” and “C” could be pocketed with the same aim. Isn’t it interesting and even a little
unexpected that the same aim can be used to make two radically different shots? That’s
probably one reason why aim-and-pivot systems like these seem very attractive at times.
However, as you can see in the diagram, this amazing result only occurs for certain distances
and angles to a pocket. So the next time you hear claims about using the same aim for multiple
shots with an aim-and-pivot system, pull out this article and show the diagrams to the person
making the claims. If the person gives you a full-proof method to circumvent these issues, please
let me know so I can give them due praise and write a follow-up article (with their permission).

Billiards Digest                                                                              November, 2008
                                                                                         c
                                  example line of site
                                     before pivot
                                                                                     b
                    center-ball                                    a
                   cue position
                    after pivot

                                          A                  B                   C

                              The distance between the balls affects the shot.

                   Diagram 2 Same pivot-based aim with different ball distances

      At the beginning of the article, I announced a new aiming system with snake-oil-salesman
style. I was partly joking, but I actually do recommend a “system” I call DAM (“Dave’s Aiming
Method”). I think it has some good guidance for players wanting to improve their aiming skills.
Unlike with the beginning of the article, I’m being serious now. Here’s how the DAM system
works: You visualize the required "angle of the shot" and required "line of aim" (per the advice
below), you then align your cue and vision with the line of aim as you drop into your stance, you
then       follow   all   of    the      recommended       stroke    "best     practices"      (see
billiards.colostate.edu/resources/stroke_best_practices.pdf). Be sure to maintain "quiet eyes"
both at the "set" aiming position, checking both the CB tip contact point and your aiming line, and
when focusing on your OB target during the final forward stroke. If you have a good stroke and
maintain focus and don't do anything wrong during the entire DAM process, you will make every
shot.

      I think good pool players use all visual information available to them to help see the required
angle of the shot and the necessary line of aim. They might use any or all of: ghost-ball
visualization, ball-to-ball contact-point visualization, impact-line (or "target line" or "line of
centers") visualization, center-to-edge (CTE) 1/2-ball-hit line visualization, etc. They also
intuitively make adjustments where necessary for squirt, swerve, and throw (see
billiards.colostate.edu/threads/aiming.html#compensation) based on shot distance, shot speed,
cue elevation, ball and cloth conditions, amount and type of spin, etc. I don’t think a good player
needs a mechanical "system” to help with the visualization part. If you don’t fall into this category,
there are drills and techniques you can use to help develop your visualization skills so you can
improve your ability to "see" the shot. For example, see NV 3.1, NV 3.2, NV B.3, and my article
last month. Also, I have a useful ghost-ball aiming summary and drill on my website (see
billiards.colostate.edu/resources/ghost_ball_aiming.pdf). Well, that’s it … that’s the whole DAM
process.
                   NV 3.1 – Practicing contact point and ghost ball visualization
                   NV 3.2 – Using the cue to help visualize the impact and aiming lines
normal video       NV B.3 – Mike Page's aiming video (part 1, part 2)

Billiards Digest                                                                             November, 2008
    Regardless of what I or anybody else says, the most important components for success with
any “aiming system” are:

                               PRACTICE ... PRACTICE ... PRACTICE!!!

                                                    and

                                     FOCUS ... FOCUS ... FOCUS!!!

FOCUS implies you concentrate and spend time on establishing your aim. Not all people do this.
Another aspect of FOCUS is keeping your eyes "quiet" so you have a clear and stable vision
during the aim. Also, maintain full concentration on stroke execution during the final stroke.
During the stroke, you should not be second-guessing any of the stuff about the shot (e.g., speed,
spin, CB path, strategy, etc.) you should have decided and figured out before you settle into your
stance.

    I worry (and know) some people will think this article is disrespectful to some of the well-
known instructors out there that promote and teach basic cut-shot aiming systems. This was
certainly not my intent. I sometimes disagree with some of the well-known instructors, but I still
have tremendous respect for them and their abilities to help people improve their games.
However, I think people should be more honest and realistic when promoting or teaching “aiming
systems.” For example:

           System X will help you focus and make balls you haven’t made before. It won’t work for
      every shot over a wide range of distances and cut angles, but it does “help get you in the ball-
      park” for many shots. You still need to make small adjustments between the reference
      aiming lines, especially to compensate for squirt, swerve, and/or throw, but the system
      provides a good framework of reference lines that serve as good points of departure. With
      lots of practice, the system will be less necessary as you develop your visualization skills and
      adjustment intuition to better see the angle of the shot and know how and when to
      compensate.

If you want more information and opinions about why various aiming systems are helpful, despite
                                                                          nd
some of the critical information in this article, see the answers to the 2 question under “aiming
systems” in the FAQ section of my website. Basic cut-shot “aiming systems” can help some (if
not many) people, and there is much anecdotal evidence on the Internet forums to back this up.

    Well, I hope you are enjoying and benefiting from my series of articles on fundamentals.
Next month, we will look at important issues related to CB control, unless I feel like writing
another article on aiming systems.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access
          them online at billiards.colostate.edu.
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, impact
          line, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
          come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
          glossary in the “Instructor and Student Resources” section of my website.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                         November, 2008
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/fundamentals_part_iv_bridge_length.pdf
title: Fundamentals - Part IV: Bridge Length
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                                 ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Fundamentals - Part IV: Bridge Length”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. See the website for details.

     This is the fourth article in a series on fundamentals. In the last three months, I’ve covered
the stroke, the basics of aiming, and issues involved with cut-shot aiming systems. This month,
we will look at the bridge length and its effects. Diagram 1 illustrates terminology related to the
bridge and cue position. The bridge length is the distance from the bridge pivot to the front edge
of the cue ball (CB). The tip gap is the distance between the tip and the CB at the “set” aiming
position (i.e., your cue and body position before the final stroke). In general, you want the tip gap
to be as small as possible when you are finalizing your aim. A smaller gap will help you better
visualize where the tip contact point will be relative to the center of the CB. With a larger gap,
parallax caused by our stereoscopic vision (i.e., the different views created by each eye) can
more easily give a false perception of the exact tip placement. Also, with a smaller gap, your
forearm will remain close to perpendicular to the cue both during the “set” position and at impact
with the cue, helping to ensure an accurate vertical tip position on the CB (with a non-elbow-drop
stroke). On the flip side, the smaller the gap, the greater chance you have of contacting the CB
accidently during the warm-up strokes. Bottom line: use as small of a gap as possible without
risking unintentional contact with the CB.

                                            bridge length

                                                        tip gap
                                      bridge

                              Diagram 1 Bridge length terminology

     The decision on what bridge length to use is a little more involved than the tip gap distance.
Instructors generally recommend a bridge length in the 6-8 inch range; although, some great
players (e.g., the Filipino players) seem to do quite well with a much longer bridge. Diagram 2
shows one issue related to bridge length: the longer the bridge, the larger your tip position error
will be with unintentional stroking errors (see TP A.10). In Diagram 2a, the bridge is long and the
resulting tip position error is relatively large for a given stroke error. In Diagram 2b, the stroke
error is the same, but the resulting tip position error is much smaller because of the shorter
bridge. Tip position error will result in unintentional English; and the larger the position error, the
greater the English. With English comes squirt (CB deflection), swerve (CB curve), and throw
(object ball direction change), all of which can reduce your chances of pocketing a shot. For
more information on squirt, swerve, and throw, see my previous articles on these topics.

Billiards Digest                                                                        December, 2008
                                        bridge pivot
                                                                           large
                                                                       tip position
                    stroke error                                           error
                                           (a) long bridge length

                                                                      much smaller
                       same                                            tip position
                    stroke error                                           error
                                           (b) short bridge length

                   Diagram 2 Larger bridge length creates more tip position error

                   TP A.10 – The effect of bridge length on contact point accuracy
technical proof

    Diagram 3 shows another effect related to bridge length. In this case, bridge length is
affecting the visibility of the end of the cue. This can affect how well you sight the cue along the
desired aiming line. In Diagram 3a, a closed bridge is being used with a relatively short bridge,
resulting in an obscured view of the end of the cue. In Diagram 3b, with a longer bridge, more of
the end of the cue is visible making it easier to sight along the cue and align with the desired
aiming line. In Diagram 3c, an open bridge is used, which offers an unobscured view of the entire
end of the cue, making sighting even easier. This effect becomes more important when your
head (and eyes) are lower and closer to the cue. You will notice that players who are low in their
stance generally prefer an open bridge and/or a longer bridge. This allows them to more easily
sight and align the cue. Generally, a lower stance, with your chin close to the cue, results in more
accuracy. Snooker players, who require tremendous accuracy due to the large table size and
small pockets, typically have a very low stance and use an open bridge. This technique has also
become more popular in the pool world in recent history.

                   Diagram 3 Effects of bridge length and bridge type on sighting

Billiards Digest                                                                      December, 2008
    Bridge length is also very important if you are using pivot-based “aiming systems” (e.g.,
center-to-edge [CTE], Pro-One, or 90-90 swivel) taught by some instructors. With these systems,
there are various techniques to establish an initial offset cue alignment, and then the cue is
pivoted to the center of the CB. Diagram 4 shows an example where the initial cue alignment is
offset. Obviously, when the cue is pivoted to the center of the CB relative to the bridge pivot, the
bridge length has an effect on the final aim of the shot. With the shorter bridge (shown in blue),
the OB is cut thinner than with the longer bridge (shown in red). If you are using a pivot-based
system, you need to be aware of these effects. For more info on cut-shot “aiming systems,” see
my previous two articles.

               long                                                                           final
              bridge                                                                           OB
              length                                                                       directions

                                                                                    pre-pivot
                           short                                                      90/90
                          bridge                            lines of cue            alignment
                          length                          pivoted back to
                                                             center ball

                    Diagram 4 Effect of bridge length on pivot-based aiming systems

    Here’s a fairly complete summary of all of the cons and pros of a longer bridge, including the
items discussed above:

     Disadvantages of a longer bridge:

          •        Stroking errors result in larger tip position errors (see Diagram 2).

          •        If the length is not needed for power (see below), the longer stroke might allow more
                   room for error to be introduced during the stroke (i.e., a shorter, more compact stroke
                   might be more accurate).

          •        If a player has a long bridge but is not using the full length on the back stroke, the
                   bridge length (and associated tip position error) is larger than it needs to be.
                   However, if the extra length is helping with sighting and aiming (see Diagram 3), it
                   might be justified.

          •        A small change in bridge position creates a larger change in cue tip position. If the
                   bridge hand shifts accidentally or deforms during the stroke, or if the cue shifts
                   slightly within the bridge, larger errors will result.

          •        For soft touch shots, a shorter bridge and stroke is usually more effective.

     Advantages of a longer bridge:

          •        A longer bridge can help improve visual sighting (see Diagram 3).

          •        Smoother acceleration is possible, especially when using more power. Not as much
                   force will be required over the longer distance to achieve a desired cue speed. The
                   stroke will tend to be jerkier and usually more susceptible to errors with a shorter
                   bridge, requiring larger forces over the shorter distance to achieve the desire cue
                   speed.

Billiards Digest                                                                                December, 2008
          •        A person with large and/or inflexible hands might need to elevate the back of the cue
                   more with a shorter bridge, and cue elevation can reduce accuracy by creating more
                   swerve when English is used (intentionally or not). Using a longer bridge can help
                   some people keep their cue more level, especially with draw shots. I want to thank
                   “Spiderman,” a user on the BD CCB online forum, for pointing out the “large-hand”
                   factor to me. I hadn’t thought of this before.

          •        A longer bridge might better match the natural pivot length for your cue (especially
                   low-squirt cues). This can help reduce CB direction errors when unintentional
                   English is applied (e.g., due to stroke swoop). It can also be important if using the
                   back-hand English (BHE) method to compensate for squirt when applying English
                   intentionally. For more information on these topics, see “aim compensation for squirt,
                   swerve, and throw” in the FAQ section of my website.

          •        A longer bridge and stroke might help some people gauge the speed of the shot
                   better; although, this might not apply for soft touch shots (see above).

          •        Some people just feel more natural and comfortable with a longer bridge and stroke,
                   and shortening it will feel too uncomfortable (even after practice), and their overall
                   performance will not be better with a change. Like many things in pool, personal
                   preference and comfort is often an important factor.

    I hope this article doesn’t make you think and worry too much about your bridge length.
Regardless, you might try some drills (e.g., MOFUDAT available under “drills” in the resources
section of my website) and experiment with various bridge lengths at different speeds to see what
works best for you.

   Well, I hope you are enjoying and benefiting from my series of articles on fundamentals.
Next month, we will start looking at important issues related to CB control.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access
          them online at billiards.colostate.edu.
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, impact
          line, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
          come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
          glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                           December, 2008
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/fundamentals_part_v_cb_position_control.pdf
title: Fundamentals - Part V: CB position control
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                                         ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Fundamentals - Part V: CB position control”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

    This is the fifth article in a series on fundamentals. In the last four months, I’ve covered the
stroke, the basics of aiming, issues involved with cut-shot aiming systems, and the effects of
bridge length. This month we will start looking at important issues related to cue ball (CB) control.
An important skill in pool, beyond pocketing balls, is being able to predict fairly accurately where
the CB will go during a shot. This skill is useful for avoiding scratches (e.g., see NV 3.7, NV 3.10,
and NV B.46), playing position for the next shot (e.g., see NV 5.1 and NV 5.2), and planning and
executing carom shots (e.g., see NV 7.2-7.4 and NV B.46) and break-out shots (e.g., see NV
B.46). Diagram 1 illustrates several reference lines that are useful in predicting the CB’s path
and direction. The first and most well known reference line is the tangent line predicted by the
90º rule (the blue shot in the diagram). For a stun shot (AKA a “stop shot at an angle”), where the
CB is sliding with no top or bottom spin at object ball (OB) impact, the CB will head exactly in the
tangent-line direction (assuming perfect balls), which is perpendicular to the OB direction. For
more information, see my January '04 and March-June '05 articles. FYI, a convenient one-page
summary of the 90º rule can be found in the instructor/student resources section of my website
under “summaries.” In NV B.43, I demonstrate several methods for using the cue and your hand
to help you visualize the tangent line.

                   fast                                 tangent
                   medium
                                    draw
                                                          line
                   slow                                               stun

                               3A                                                   follow

                                           2A                              30º
                                                                    90º
                                                                                  cut
                                  A                                              angle
                                                                                  (A)
                                           ghost ball       peace
                                             target          sign

                              Diagram 1 Useful CB reference lines

Billiards Digest                                                                             January, 2009
                   NV 3.7 – Using the 90º rule to check for and prevent a scratch
                   NV 3.10 – Using the 30º rule to check for and prevent a scratch
                   NV 5.1 – Using speed and angle-control to pocket a three-ball sequence
                   NV 5.2 – Using speed and angle-control to pocket another three-ball sequence
                   NV 7.2 – Cue ball billiard shot
normal video       NV 7.3 – Object ball carom shot
                   NV 7.4 – 30º rule billiard shot
                   NV B.43 – CB position control stun, roll, and draw reference lines
                   NV B.46 – CB path scratch avoid, cluster break-out, and carom examples

     Another useful reference direction is for a rolling CB, where the 30º rule applies. The rule
predicts that over a wide range of cut angles, between a 1/4-ball and 3/4-ball hit, the CB will
deflect by very close to 30º from its original direction after hitting the OB (see the red shot in
Diagram 1). Demonstrations can be viewed in NV 3.8-3.10, and more information can be found
in my April '04 and June '05 articles. If you want to be more precise, the deflection angle is a little
more than 30º (about 34º) closer to a 1/2-ball hit and a little less (about 27º) closer to a 1/4-ball or
3/4-ball hit. If you want an easy way to use your hand to accurately visualize the CB direction,
use the Dr. Dave peace-sign technique. A firm, but relaxed, “peace sign” is very close to 30 for
most people, so if you point one finger in the original direction of the CB, the other finger will point
in the final direction of the CB (see the “peace sign” in Diagram 1 and demonstrations in NV 3.8
and NV B.43). In NV B.44, I show how you can use angle templates and your opposite hand to
help you calibrate your “peace sign,” not only for the average 30º angle, but for other useful
references as well (e.g., 27º and 34º). FYI, the angle templates and a convenient one-page
summary of the 30º rule can be found in the instructor/student resources section of my website.
                   NV 3.8 – Using your hand to visualize the 30º rule
                   NV 3.9 – 30º rule example
normal video
                   NV 3.10 – Using the 30º rule to check for and prevent a scratch
                   NV B.44 – Dr. Dave 30º rule peace-sign hand calibration

     A third useful reference for CB control is the draw direction predicted by the “trisect system.”
It applies for a draw shot with good draw action, and for cut angles smaller than about 40º (i.e.,
ball-hit fraction greater than about 3/8). By “good draw action,” I mean you are hitting quite low
on the CB (near the miscue limit) and with enough speed so not much bottom-spin wears off (i.e.,
there is very little “drag”) on the way to the OB. For details on the system, see my March '06
article. It is called the “trisect system” because the cut angle of the shot is 1/3 of the total angle
between the original and final CB directions (see the purple shot in Diagram 1 with angles “A” and
“3A”). Again, this applies only for “good action” draw shots where the cut angle is less than about
40º.

      You can use a modified version of the Dr. Dave peace-sign technique to predict the CB
direction for draw shots also. As shown in Diagram 2, you point one finger in the direction of the
initial CB direction and you point the other finger in the desired OB direction. This defines the cut
angle for the shot. Most people can comfortably form angles up to 40º with the index and middle
fingers; but it you have trouble, you can use your thumb and index fingers instead. Because most
people cannot comfortably form angles much larger than 40º with a stretched peace sign, the
hand technique also ensures you don’t use the trisect system for larger cuts where it doesn’t
apply. Ideally, the vertex of the angle (i.e., the point where the finger lines meet in the base of the
hand, as shown in the top-right portion of Diagram 2), should be centered directly over the center
of the ghost-ball target. If you pivot your hand twice, moving the original CB-direction finger in the
direction of the shot, the original OB-direction finger will now be three-times the cut angle away
from the original CB-finger direction. As shown in Diagram 2, with each pivot, one finger should
be rotated until it reaches the original direction of the other finger. If you have trouble visualizing
where to stop each pivot, use the cue (or your other hand) to mark the second finger direction
before pivoting your hand to the new position. Diagram 2 shows the second and third hand

Billiards Digest                                                                           January, 2009
positions offset from the first hand position (to prevent clutter in the illustration), but in practice it is
better to just pivot the hand in place over the GB target. See NV B.43 for a demonstration. For
the example shot in Diagram 1 and NV B.43, the cut angle for the shot happens to be 30º
(because the shot happens to be a 1/2-ball hit). Therefore, the final CB direction is 90º away
from (i.e., perpendicular to) the original CB direction (90º = 3 X 30º). For fuller hits, the angle will
be less, and for thinner cuts; the angle will be more. Again, for more information, refer back to my
March '06 article.

                                                        parallel

                                     3A                                                angle
                                                2A                                     vertex
                                                                                        point

                                                            1
                                        A                                    A

                                                                2
                                                                         3

                                                                                  2A

                         Diagram 2 Trisect system peace-sign technique

     For shots "in between" all of the cases above, the CB will go somewhere in between the
indicated directions. For example, if you hit the CB only slightly above center and CB doesn’t
have full roll at OB impact, then the CB will head somewhere in between the tangent line and the
30 line. With half roll, it would go about halfway in between. The only way to get a feel for how
much "in between" the CB will go is to practice ... a lot! NV B.46 shows how judgment and small
adjustment come into play. The video also provides good examples of how all of the principles in
this article are applied in shot examples.

     For different cut angles, all of the reference lines are different. Diagram 3 shows where the
lines would be for the same OB location as in Diagram 1, but with a different CB location, creating
a fuller hit (smaller cut angle). As you can see, for smaller cut angles, the references lines are
further apart. Likewise, for larger cut angles (thinner hits), the lines get closer, converging on the
tangent line (e.g., see HSV B.23).

Billiards Digest                                                                                January, 2009
                                                               stun
                                 draw

                     fast
                                    3A                                              follow
                     medium
                     slow                   2A
                                                                      30º
                                                              90º
                                        A                                    cut
                                                                            angle
                                                                             (A)

                            Diagram 3 Reference lines for a different cut angle

                   HSV B.23 – Cue ball path speed, spin, and cue elevation effects
high-speed video

     Diagram 4 illustrates the effects shot speed has on the exact path of the CB. For a stun
shot, speed has no effect on the CB path. The CB heads and persists along the tangent-line
direction, regardless of shot speed. But with draw or follow shots, speed does have an effect on
the path of the CB. Regardless of the amount of top or bottom spin, the CB always starts along
the tangent line. With faster speed, the CB stays closer to the tangent-line longer before the ball
curves to the final direction predicted by the reference lines described above. For slow speed
shots, the CB departs away from the tangent line almost immediately, and the curving of the CB
is almost imperceptible. In these cases, the CB heads straight in the reference-line direction
almost immediately off the OB (e.g., see the slower red and orange shots in Diagram 4). The
effect of increased speed can easily be visualized by shifting the “peace-sign” hand along the
tangent line (see the peace sign shift in the diagram for the blue shot). The faster the shot, the
more you shift your hand along the tangent line. The shift offsets the reference line a different
amount for each speed, but the final direction of the CB is the same (i.e., the lines are parallel) at
all speeds. My June ‘05 article, NV B.45, and HSV B.23 offer good illustrations, explanations,
and demonstrations of this effect.

Billiards Digest                                                                             January, 2009
                                                             tangent
                                          fast
                                          medium
                                                               line
                                          slow
                                                                                         fast
                                                                                         medium
                                                 fast                                    slow
                                                 medium
                                                 slow
                                                                                  fast
                                                                                  medium
                                                                                  slow
                             : parallel

                                           Diagram 4 Speed effects

                      NV B.45 – Cue ball path speed effects
normal video

   Well, I hope you are enjoying and benefiting from my series of articles on fundamentals.
Over the next three months, we will continue looking at important issues related to CB control.
Specifically, we will look at some examples, thin and full hits, and speed control.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access
               them online at billiards.colostate.edu.
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, impact
               line, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
               come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
               glossary on my website.
      •        I want to thank “Jal” on the BD CCB online forum. He graciously proof-reads my articles
               every month to help find errors and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a
               result of his efforts. Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                  January, 2009
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/fundamentals_part_vi_cb_control_examples.pdf
title: Fundamentals - Part VI: CB control examples
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                                 ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Fundamentals - Part VI: CB control examples”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the sixth article in a series on fundamentals. In the last five months, I’ve covered the
stroke, the basics of aiming, issues involved with cut-shot aiming systems, the effects of bridge
length, and the basics of cue ball (CB) control. This month we will look at some examples of how
to apply the CB control principles covered last month. We will look at examples of how to avoid a
scratch and how to plan and execute carom and break-out shots. Recall, the 90º rule predicts
that the CB will head straight in the tangent-line direction for a stun shot, where the CB has no
topspin or bottom-spin at object ball (OB) contact. The 30º rule predicts a rolling CB will deflect
by close to 30º, with respect to its original direction, for a wide range of shots. And the trisect
system predicts, for a good action draw shot, the final direction of the CB will be three-times the
cut angle away from the original direction (see last month’s article and NV B.43 for more
information).

                   NV B.43 – CB position control stun, roll, and draw reference lines
normal video

     Diagram 1 shows an example of how to detect and avoid a possible scratch. Our goal is to
pocket the 1-ball in the corner pocket and leave the CB with an easy shot on the 8-ball to win the
game. From the 30º rule, a slow rolling CB will likely result in a scratch (see the red shot in the
diagram). You can use the Dr. Dave peace-sign technique (see NV 3.8 and NV B.43) to easily
visualize the 30º direction. (Note – per NV B.44, for a shot close to a ½-bal hit, you want to
stretch your peace sign slightly to visualize an angle slightly larger than 30º; and for shots closer
to a ¼-ball or ¾-ball hit, you want to relax your peace sign slightly to visualize an angle slightly
smaller than 30º.) The blue shot in the diagram shows what happens if you use a little more
speed. As shown in NV B.45, the more speed you use on a roll shot, the more the CB persists
along the tangent-line direction before it curves to the final 30º direction. This slight shift is
enough to avoid the pocket and get position on the 8-ball shot. However, if you use enough
speed to safely clear the pocket, you might over-run the desired CB location; and because the CB
“crosses the line” of the 8-ball shot, over-running will result in a much tougher shot. A better
option is shown in purple. Here, less speed is used, but the CB is hit lower so full roll does not
develop before contact with the 1-ball. As a result, the CB heads in between the tangent-line and
30º directions. Also, the deflection off the side rail helps slow the CB and send it toward a
desirable “shot line” for the 8-ball. If the speed is too slow or a little fast, you will still have a good
shot at the 8-ball to win the game. All of these alternatives are demonstrated in NV B.46. Other
scratch detect and avoid examples are demonstrated in NV 3.7 and NV 3.10. To get a better feel
for how speed, distance, and tip offset affect how much roll the CB has at OB contact, check out
the stop/follow/draw drill in the “Instructor and Student Resources” section of my website.

Billiards Digest                                                                             February, 2009
                   NV 3.7 – Using the 90º rule to check for and prevent a scratch
                   NV 3.8 – Using your hand to visualize the 30º rule
                   NV 3.10 – Using the 30º rule to check for and prevent a scratch
                   NV B.43 – CB position control stun, roll, and draw reference lines
normal video       NV B.44 – Dr. Dave 30º rule peace-sign hand calibration
                   NV B.45 – Cue ball path speed effects
                   NV B.46 – CB path scratch avoid, cluster break-out, and carom examples

                                fast
                                medium            tangent
                                slow                line
                                fast
                                medium
                                slow

                                fast
                                medium                            30º
                                slow

                                                       1
                                                                                     8
                                               peace
                                                sign

                            Diagram 1 Detecting and avoiding a scratch

     Diagram 2 shows an example where knowledge of and creativity with CB control principles
can help you make intelligent decisions and win more games. In this 9-ball example, there are
several options. One option is to try to cut the 6-ball into the far corner pocket, but this is a
difficult shot and you still need to get a shot on the 7-ball which is in a tough spot. You could play
safe by hitting the 6-ball squarely, banking it to the opposite side rail and stopping the CB in place
(or drawing it back slightly) to hide the CB behind the 8-ball, forcing your opponent to kick at the
6-ball. But your opponent might easily make contact with the 6-ball with a kick shot; and even if
he or she didn’t, you still don’t have an easy out with ball in hand. A great option in this situation
is a billiard shot, where you carom (kiss) the CB off the 6-ball to pocket the 9-ball and win the
game. The best scenario for a billiards shots is when the ball you want to hit (the 9-ball in this
example) is along the 30º direction. In that case, a slow roll shot can be used and you have a
huge margin for error (see my June ’04 article for more info). Unfortunately, the 9-ball is not in
the 30º path in this example. However, if you are good at hitting a stun shot, a 90º carom is a
great option in situations like this. As demonstrated in NV B.46, the first step is to find the
necessary aiming line to send the 6-ball perpendicular to (90º away from) the desired final CB
direction. Then, you just need to execute a stun shot (a “stop shot at an angle”) to send the 6-ball
in the planned direction. If you are concerned about scratching, you can use less speed (and hit
the CB a little lower to ensure stun) and/or aim for a less direct hit on the 9-ball. Obviously, to be
effective with 90º carom shots, you need to have a good feel for creating stun for different speeds
and distances to the OB. As I pointed out before, the stop/follow/draw drill in the “Instructor and
Student Resources” section of my website can help you with this. Other billiards and carom shot
examples are described and demonstrated in NV 7.2-7.4.

Billiards Digest                                                                         February, 2009
                                    7
                                                    90º             9

                                                              30º

                                                              6

                                                          8

                                           fast
                                           medium
                                           slow

                                  Diagram 2 Carom shot example

                   NV 7.2 – Cue ball billiard shot
                   NV 7.3 – Object ball carom shot
normal video       NV 7.4 – 30º rule billiard shot

     Diagram 3 shows an example where CB control principles can be helpful with breaking out
clusters. In the diagram, the goal is to pocket the 1-ball while breaking up the 4-ball-7-ball cluster
so you can run the table. With a stun shot, the CB would head along the tangent line and miss
the cluster. A slow roll shot would also leave the cluster untouched as the CB headed in the 30º
direction. So to hit the cluster, the CB must have partial roll. An ideal path is shown in the
diagram where the CB hits the 4-ball fairly squarely. As a result, the 7-ball is sent toward the
corner pocket, the 4-ball drifts out from the rail for several options, and the CB doesn’t move very
much. With the resulting layout, a good player should have no trouble running the table for the
win. With this shot, close to a center ball hit will get the job done. With medium speed the CB will
develop some (but not complete) roll on the way to the 1-ball, and the CB will take a path similar
to that shown in the diagram (see NV B.46 for demonstrations). Like many things in pool, you
need to develop a feel for how much speed and tip offset to use in different situations. That can
come only with lots of practice. But understanding all of the principles involved should help you
learn faster and be a better shot planner.

Billiards Digest                                                                         February, 2009
                                                                   4 7
                                                   tangent
                                                     line
                                         fast
                                         medium
                                        slow

                                                                  30º

                                                      1
                                                                                      8

                                Diagram 3 Break-out shot example

   Well, I hope you are enjoying and benefiting from my series of articles on fundamentals.
Over the next two months, we will continue looking at important issues related to CB control.
Specifically, we will look at thin and full hits, and speed control.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access
          them online at billiards.colostate.edu.
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, impact
          line, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
          come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
          glossary on my website.
      •   I want to thank “Jal” on the BD CCB online forum. He graciously proof-reads my articles
          every month to help find errors and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a
          result of his efforts. Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                          February, 2009
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/fundamentals_part_vii_speed_control.pdf
title: Fundamentals - Part VII: speed control
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                                 ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Fundamentals - Part VII: speed control”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

    This is the seventh article in a series on fundamentals. In the last six months, I’ve covered
the stroke, the basics of aiming, issues involved with cut-shot aiming systems, the effects of
bridge length, and the basics of cue ball direction control. This month we will look at speed
control, which refers to how firmly you strike the CB to have it stop close to the spot you want for
the next shot. Obviously, with good aim and alignment, a consistent an accurate stroke, and
knowledge of CB direction, speed control is the critical skill that separates the average players
from the great players.

      Unfortunately, there is not much that can be really “taught” or explained about speed control.
There are some drills that can help you develop speed control “feel” (e.g., see the speed control,
stop/follow/draw, and English drills in the “Instructor and Student Resources” section of my
website), but there is no silver bullet for success. The only true recipe for success is to practice
— and practice a lot — to develop a “feel” for speed control. It also helps to have some natural
“feel” ability with good eye-hand-coordination and fine motor control. Having said this, there are
still some basic speed-control principles that are useful to know. Let’s look at a few.

     Let’s start with the basic terminology illustrated in Diagram 1. When the cue ball (CB) strikes
the object ball (OB) at some cut angle (i.e., it isn’t a straight-in shot), the CB and OB will travel
different distances after impact based on the original CB speed and spin (top, bottom or none),
and the cut angle. As described in my past two articles, the exact path and direction of the CB
motion also depends on the incoming CB spin and speed. In this article, we will look at ball travel
distances for both roll and stun shots. With a roll shot, the CB is rolling naturally with no sliding
when it strikes the OB; and with a stun shot (AKA “a stop shot at an angle”), the CB has no spin
when it strikes the OB (i.e., it is sliding into the ball with no roll). It is important to remember that a
below-center hit on the CB is required to achieve stun at OB impact. At faster speeds and short
distances, you don’t need to hit much below center, but at slower speeds and/or longer distances,
more tip offset below center is required (see HSV 3.1, HSV B.10, and NV B.10 for illustrations
and more information).

                   HSV 3.1 – Stop-shot showing loss of bottom spin over distance
high-speed video   HSV B.10 – MOFUDAT stroke drill follow and draw effects

                   NV B.10 – Drag spin loss and English persistence
normal video

Billiards Digest                                                                               March, 2009
                                  Diagram 1 Basic terminology

      Now let’s look at some graphs derived from complicated math and physics analyses. Don’t
get too excited, now! (... just kidding.) If you don’t like graphs, don’t worry because I’ll describe
the results in words and show some examples. Diagram 2 shows how the post-impact CB and
OB travel distances vary at different cut angles with a stun shot. The distances (the vertical axis
on the graph) are reported as percentages of how far the CB would have travelled if it did not hit
the OB. The cut angle is shown on the horizontal scale, varying from small angles close to 0º
(i.e., thick hits) to large angles close to 90º (thin hits). Ball-hit-fraction illustrations (the ball-
overlap figures) are also included along the cut angle scale so you can easily see how cut angle
relates to ball-hit fraction (e.g., a 30º cut angle corresponds to a ½-ball ball). (FYI, if you want
more information on how ball-hit fraction relates to cut angle, see TP A.23) To help understand
the graph in Diagram 2, first consider a 0º cut-angle shot (i.e., a full-ball hit). Point “A” in the
graph implies the OB travels the full distance (100%) the CB would have travelled if it had not hit
the OB (e.g., see shots “a” and “b” in Diagram 4). Point “B” in the graph implies the CB stops in
place after impact (i.e., it travels no distance, or 0%). Point “C” corresponds to a 45º cut angle,
which is a little more than a ¼-ball hit. At this angle, with a stun shot, both balls travel the same
distance, which is half (50%) the distance the CB would have travelled with no impact. For larger
cut angles (thinner hits), closer to 90º, the graph shows that the CB loses very little speed (it
travels close to 100%), and the OB travels very little (close to 0%). Obviously, the graph does not
consider rails or other balls that might change the directions and speeds of the CB and OB after
collision.

Billiards Digest                                                                            March, 2009
                       Diagram 2 CB and OB travel distances for a stun shot

                   TP A.23 – Ball-hit fraction vs. cut angle
technical proof

     Diagram 3 shows the travel-distance graph for a follow shot, where the CB is rolling naturally
when it strikes the OB. Compare Diagram 3 to Diagram 2 to see the similarities and differences.
Looking at points “A” and “B,” we can see that for a square hit (0º cut angle), the CB follows the
OB for a distance of about 8% of the distance the CB would have travelled without the collision.
The OB travels about 50% of the collision-free rolling CB distance (see shots “a” and “c” in
Diagram 4). The ratio of these distances is good to know if you are playing position on a
precision follow shot with a fairly full hit. The OB will travel about 6-times (50/8) farther than the
CB after impact. If you play pocket speed on a shot, you can expect the CB to travel only 1/6 of
the distance to the pocket. If you hit the OB hard enough to send it two table lengths, the CB will
follow only about 1/3 of a table length (2 x 1/6). Actually, in this case, the CB would travel farther
because the rail rebound slows the OB substantially (about 50% per HSV B.15), so the shot
speed is actually enough to send the OB more than two table lengths, without rails. Also be
aware that the graphs and numbers above are for absolutely perfect balls. TP A.16 includes
graphs and results for non-perfect conditions. For the square-hit roll shot, depending on the ball
and cloth conditions, the OB might roll closer to 7-times, or even 8-times, longer than the CB.
You should test this out on various tables to see if your number is closer to 6 or 8. It’s a little
more than 7 on my table. By the way, if you want to see the math and physics behind the graphs
in Diagrams 2 and 3, and for additional results, check out TP 3.2 and TP A.16.

                   HSV B.15 – straight-on kick shot rebound losses and spin changes for roll, stun,
high-speed video      and draw shots

                   TP 3.2 – Ball speeds and distances after stun-shot impact
technical proof    TP A.16 – Final ball speeds, distances, and directions for natural roll shots

Billiards Digest                                                                             March, 2009
                    Diagram 3 CB and OB travel distances for a follow shot

                          Diagram 4 Ball travel distance comparisons

     Another useful conclusion from Diagram 3 concerns point “C” where the CB and the OB
travel the same distance after impact. This occurs at a little less than a ½-ball hit, which is slightly
more than a 30º cut angle. It turns out the angles at which both balls deflect away from the
original CB line are also very close to being equal (about 30º), as a result of the 30º rule (see my
past articles on this topic). As shown in Diagram 5, this equal distance and equal angle case can
be very useful when visualizing and executing a safety. This is an example from a game of 9-
ball. There is no good offensive option with 1-ball. The 3-ball and 4-ball block the paths to the
corner pockets and a combination would be too risky. The 8-ball also prevents a two-way,

Billiards Digest                                                                             March, 2009
straight-back bank shot. The obvious shot here is a safety. With close to a ½-ball hit, both the
CB and OB will head at approximately 30º angles relative to the original CB direction. If you have
trouble visualizing these angles, you can use my peace-sign trick (see the “30º rule” in the FAQ
section of my website for more information). Because the 1-ball is close to the centerline of the
table, both the CB and OB can end up close to the side rails. Even if your speed is off a little, the
rails and the 6-ball and 7-ball will help stop the balls close to the positions shown. This final
position would put your opponent in a tough spot, and you would likely get ball-in-hand on your
next shot, giving you a good chance to run-out to win the game. Balls aren’t always arranged on
the table as nicely as those in Diagram 5, but the principle can be applied in various situations.

                          Diagram 5 Example rolling ½-ball hit safety

   Well, I hope you are enjoying and benefiting from my series of articles on fundamentals.
Next month, we will look at the draw shot in detail since many amateurs often have trouble
executing and controlling this very important shot.

     I want to close with a speed-control-related phrase a British buddy of mine likes to use when
he sees “bangers” at a bar or pool hall. He uses the phrase “He put too much ‘American’ on the
ball” to characterize the typical drunk and obnoxious novice player in a bar or pool hall that
always hits the ball harder than he should, and is clueless about getting position for the next shot.
This is my British buddy’s little joke because he doesn’t like when Americans say: “He put too
much ‘English’ on the ball.” In the UK, they refer to sidespin as “side,” not “English.” We don’t
always agree on terminology, but we share a common love for pool (and good beer) ... and that’s
good enough for me. Cheers mate!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   If you want to refer to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access them
          online at billiards.colostate.edu.

Billiards Digest                                                                          March, 2009
     •    I want to thank “Colin Colenso” and “Jal” on the Internet forums for helping me work
          through and improve the presentation of the results in my ball motion analysis
          documents.
     •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, impact
          line, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
          come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
          glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                            March, 2009
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/gadget_cares_for_your_best_friend.pdf
title: Gadget Cares For Your Best Friend
topics: uncategorized
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
[NO_EXTRACTED_TEXT]
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/gadget_keeps_suspension_even.pdf
title: Gadget Keeps Suspension Even
topics: uncategorized
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
[NO_EXTRACTED_TEXT]
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/gender_in_pool_battle_of_the_trans_sexes.pdf
title: Gender in Pool ... The "Battle of the Trans Sexes Harriet Haynes, a professional English pool
topics: cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
Gender in Pool … The “Battle of the Trans Sexes”
                                               Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

     Harriet Haynes, a professional English pool
player has had an impressive tournament record             Harriet Haynes
over the years (see the sidebar). However,                 English Pool Association
many of her competitors have not been happy                Women’s Championships
with her success. For example, Lynne Pinches
(in the English Pool Association’s 2023
Champion of Champions) and Kim O’Brien (in                 • World Ladies Team Champions, 2024, 2022
the 2024 European Pool Championship) made it               • World Ladies Masters Champion, 2024, 2023
to the tournament Finals with Harriet and                  • European Ladies Champion, 2024
forfeited their matches just before the opening            • World Scotch Doubles Champion, 2023
lag shot. Why would top women pros do such a               • European Champion, 2023
thing, refusing the chance to win a prestigious            • European Team Champions, 2023, 2022, 2020
tournament title? Well, Harriet is a transgender           • National Ladies Singles, Champion 2022
woman, and her opponents claim she has an                  • World Champion, 2022 (IPA)
unfair advantage against biological females. A             • National Champion of Champions, 2021, 2018
transgender woman is a person born male who
identifies as a female and often undergoes
gender reassignment hormone treatments and elective surgeries to become a woman. Harriet’s opponents forfeited
their matches in protest to convince tournament organizations to change their transgender inclusion policies.

                                     Harriet Haynes, English Pool professional

     In response to the controversy, the English Blackball Pool Federation (EBPF) decided to institute a transgender
exclusion policy in female-only events. Here is a quote from their public statement: “… only biological [females] would
be eligible to compete in the Female Tour. We made this decision in the interests of fairness, because we believe that
people who have gone through male puberty have a competitive advantage over biological [females].” Under this new
policy, Harriet will no longer be eligible to compete in Female Tour events. Instead, she will be required to enter Open
events (with the men), as she did before she underwent transgender hormone therapy and surgeries to become a
Billiards Digest                                            1                                                  May 2025
woman. Harriet does not think it is fair to be excluded from female events since she considers herself a female and is
legally recognized as such. She feels her exclusion is discrimination. She does not want to be forced to compete in
Open divisions since she is legally female. In fact, she feels so strongly about this, she filed a lawsuit against the
EBPF. In online video cdn.jwplayer.com/previews/wfp9y1Ka, Harriet explains the story in her own words and talks
about the purpose of the lawsuit. What do you think? Should transgender women be allowed to compete in female
cue sport events?

                   Harriet Haynes awarded championship trophy after Lynne Pinches forfeited

     One thing that makes this legal case interesting is that transgender athletes have been in the news a lot lately
with high profile stories. The most recent example involves Harriet making it into an Ultimate Pool Women’s Pro
Series Final against another Trans-Gender athlete (Lucy Smith). Harriet won the Final on April 6, 2025, the day
before the EBPF discrimination trial began! Another is from NCAA women’s volleyball, where some teams recently
refused to play against the San Jose State team because it includes a transgender athlete. The NCAA does not
currently exclude transgender athletes from women’s events and this policy recently survived a court challenge, so
the transgender volleyball player is officially allowed to continue to play, despite opponent team protests. Although,
President Donald Trump recently signed an executive order (February 2025) aiming to ban transgender athletes from
competing on girls’ and women’s sports teams by denying federal funds to any schools that allow it. The ramifications
of this will probably take years to settle in courts or in Congress.

     Another thing that makes Harriet’s case interesting is that it is not obvious to most people that males should have
an advantage over females in pool, except maybe with a power shot like the break. I personally have a strong interest
in this potentially landmark legal case, not only because it is controversial and could set a precedent throughout all
cue sports, but because I was asked to serve as an expert witness in support of the EBPF. My role, along with a
biology expert, was to help convince a judge that being born male and having gone through puberty gives a
transgender woman athlete an unfair advantage in competing against biological females in pool.
Billiards Digest                                            2                                                  May 2025
          Billy Jean King and Bobby Riggs in a press conference before their “Battle of the Sexes” match

     When I first heard about the case, two things came to mind. The first was the 1973 “Battle of the Sexes” tennis
match between Billy Jean King and Bobby Riggs (see the photo above). The event was a media sensation and fun to
watch, but all it proved was that one of the greatest professional female tennis players of all time could defeat a
mediocre male pro of the time. The second thing that came to mind was the series of Bud Light “Ladies Night” TV
commercials in the mid-1990s. The photo below is from one of the ads featuring a Ladies Night pool tournament
where some men who really wanted to win some free Bud Light dressed up for the part. The photo shows them
dramatically protesting after somebody harmlessly referred to them as “guys” (“Who you callin’ guys?!”). A message
of the ads, other than humor, was: A man in lipstick and a dress still plays like a man. This is not an appropriate
analogy for the current transgender eligibility situation, but the message that males should not be allowed to
participate in female-only pool events is certainly valid.

                                     Bud Light “Ladies Night” TV commercial

Billiards Digest                                          3                                                 May 2025
Transgender Policies
     Since the lawsuit was the result of a
new transgender policy of the EBPF, I
                                                     American Poolplayers Association (APA)
researched other current policies in the
                                                     Gender Eligibility Policy
pool world. I could not find anything
online for the World Pool Association
(WPA), the international governing body
for pocket billiards, but Billiards Digest          Participation in some divisions, and events, is limited to
reached out to the WPA and received a               members of certain genders. If the eligibility of a
copy of their current draft policy (see
                                                    participant in one of these divisions, or events, is
below). I also researched the popular
pool league systems. The APA currently              questioned, the gender listed on the State/Province
has an official written policy indicating that      issued picture ID, Military ID or passport will be used to
the gender listed on any official                   determine eligibility.
government photo ID is used to determine
eligibility (see the sidebar). I could not
find any policies online for other
league/tournament systems (CSI, BCAPL, VNEA, etc.). I would suspect that informally, if an issue arose at a
tournament, the organizers would probably follow an APA-like policy. Therefore, if a transgender woman has their
gender changed on their driver’s license from male to female, which is not very difficult to do in many US States, she
would be allowed to enter these league-system female tournaments.

              World Pool Association (WPA)
              Current Draft of the Eligibility Policy for Transgender Athletes

                   Transgender Female Athletes (Male-at-Birth to Female)

                       •   Must submit a written declaration of female gender identity.

                       •   Must continuously demonstrate serum testosterone levels below 10 nmol/L for at least 12
                           months before competition. Hyperandrogenism policies address cases where female
                           athletes naturally have higher testosterone levels. Hormone testing is conducted when
                           questions arise about an athlete’s sex, not as universal screening.

                       •   Additional hormonal parameters, such as estradiol and progesterone, may be evaluated to
                           ensure compliance.

                       •   Must not have competed in the male category internationally in the last four years.

                       •   Ongoing compliance with these conditions is required.

                   General Provisions for All Transgender Athletes

                       •   Specific requirements for transgender athletes, including surgical anatomical changes, legal
                           recognition of their assigned sex, and a minimum period of hormonal therapy.

                       •   Athletes switching categories may only do so after a waiting period of four years and
                           compliance with the eligibility criteria for the new category.

                       •   All participants must meet WPA anti-doping standards and competition rules.

Billiards Digest                                               4                                                   May 2025
     I also researched the policy in bowling, thinking the issues might be similar. Although, compared to pool, strength
seems to be more important in bowling since fast ball speed with lots of ball spin can provide an advantage.
However, there have been some noteworthy tournament successes from female bowlers in events with males.
Woman pro Kelly Kulick won the 2010 Professional Bowlers Association (PBA) Tournament of Champions against all
the top men bowlers of the time. She was the first and currently only woman to ever win a PBA tour title. What made
the victory even more special was that the tournament was a Major. Also, Gianna Brandolino, a 17-year-old junior
woman bowler, won the 2024 PBA LBC National Championship Clash, where she outlasted men and women amateur,
professional, and senior championship finalists in a roll-off format, winning the championship trophy and $60,000! Not
bad for a petite teenage girl! A woman pool player has never won or even gone deep in a major open professional
tournament.

                      Professional bowler Kelly Kulick and junior bowler Gianna Brandolino

     I found a very thorough policy online from the United States Bowling Congress (USBC) concerning transgender
women participating in elite events (see below). Measured testosterone levels must be below certain thresholds,
there must be a statement from a medical doctor that birth gender does not offer a competitive advantage, and USBC
staff must evaluate and determine that the biomechanics of the person’s shot delivery (ball rev rate and speed for a
given ball weight) are in typical female ranges. The second bullet near the end of the quoted policy is particularly
interesting. It basically implies that if a transgender female bowler throws the ball like a male, she will not be allowed
to compete against the females. The USBC, the WPA, and all governing bodies in sports will probably need to
continue to modify and improve these policies over time as laws, legal precedents, presidential executive orders, and
social customs change over the years.

Billiards Digest                                              5                                                   May 2025
        United States Bowling Congress
        Gender Classification Policy Excerpt

                   Elite female competition conditions:

                       1. The athlete has declared that her gender identity is female. The declaration cannot be
                          changed, for sporting purposes, for a minimum of four years.

                       2. The athlete must demonstrate that her total testosterone level in serum has been below 10
                          nmol/L for at least 12 months prior to her first competition.

                       3. The athlete's total testosterone level in serum must remain below 10 nmol/L throughout the
                          period of desired eligibility to compete in the female category.

                       4. Compliance with these conditions may be monitored by testing. In the event of non-
                          compliance, the athlete’s eligibility for female competition will be suspended for 12 months.

                       5. Athlete must submit declaration from a medical doctor stating to a reasonable degree of
                          medical certainty that her birth gender does not give her a competitive advantage.

                       6. Athlete must complete an evaluation session at a training facility to capture video of athlete’s
                          delivery and ball tracking data. Video and data must be sent to USBC for review.

                   USBC Rules staff will evaluate the submission and make an administrative determination as to
                   whether the application is approved or if the athlete’s birth gender gives her a competitive advantage
                   and the application is denied. Rules staff may request independent opinions from medical doctors,
                   USBC trained coaches or other experts in making a determination. A determination will be based
                   upon the following criteria:

                       •   Evaluation of whether the biomechanics of the applicant’s shot delivery give a competitive
                           advantage due to birth gender.

                       •   Evaluation of whether the applicant’s ball tracking data falls within a reasonable range of
                           elite female competition.

                               o   For example, if the applicant’s rev rate and ball speed are more comparable to elite
                                   male athletes than female athletes, the application may be denied.

                       •   Opinions of medical doctors.

Billiards Digest                                                   6                                                     May 2025
Are Men Better at Pool Than Women?
    Pool has been a male dominated sport over its entire history, and it remains that way now. Currently, many more
males than females (about a 6 to 1 ratio) actively play the sport. As a result, there are many more top male players
than female. Below are the FargoRatings (from www.fargorate.com) of the top 100 males and top 100 females in the
world (as of September 2024). Notable features of the data include:

     •           There are no females in the top 100 of world ratings.
     •           The lower-ranked females in the top 100 (in the 620 range) are rated well below the lower-ranked males in
                 the top 100 (in the 780 range). The difference between 780 and 620 (140) represents a very large difference
                 in playing ability. The FargoRate system uses a logarithmic scale, so a gap of 100 points (at any level)
                 predicts a 2-to-1 game-win ratio. Therefore, the 140-point rating difference means the 100th best elite male in
                 the world is more than twice as good as the 100th best female!

                        850
                                         FargoRatings for Top 100 Males and Females

                        800

                        750
         Fargo Rating

                                                                              Top 100 Males
                                                                              Top 100 Females

                        700

                        650

                        600
                              1   12        23         34         45         56         67         78         89         100
                                                              Player Rank

                                              Top 100 Males and Females in FargoRate

     Recently, Mike Page (co-founder of FargoRate) graciously agreed to send me an anonymous list of more than
200,000 FargoRatings (with genders) worldwide, including only established players with 50 or more games in the
system as of December 2024. Thanks, Mike! This allowed me to do some analysis of gender distributions, as shown
in the plots below. The first plot is called a histogram or bar plot. The horizontal axis shows ranges of FargoRatings,
and the vertical axis shows the number of players in each FargoRate range. Per the plots of both females and males
in the system, the current amateur male population clearly plays at a higher level than the current amateur female
population. The average rating of the males is 460 compared to 337 for the females, with a difference of 123. So, the
average male in the system is more than twice as good as the average female!

   FargoRate includes worldwide game-result data from many pro pool tournaments, but the bulk of the data is from
amateur pool league systems, which include amateur male and female players of all ability levels. There are more
males in the system simply because many more males than females play pool, but there are currently still over 27,000
Billiards Digest                                                       7                                                 May 2025
females in FargoRate. The rankings and rating distributions do not necessarily prove that females cannot play as well
as males, but the data do clearly show that females currently do not play at nearly the same level as males. If
there were many more females playing pool, there would likely be more females at the elite level. But what remains
to be seen or known is: Would the average female be just as good as the average male if there were equal numbers
of males and females playing? Based on the analysis and discussion in the remainder of this article, the answer is
probably no, but we cannot know for sure without many more females participating in the sport.

                                         FargoRate Gender Distributions

     The scatter plots below show a small blue circle for each person in the FargoRate system. The dark blue sections
of the plots are due to many of the blue circles overlapping. Again, the horizontal axis is the FargoRating, but the
vertical axis now shows the number of games each person has in the system. There is a very wide spread in the
number of the games, but the median (middle) values for males (199) and females (180) are similar. The horizontal
shift in the distributions relative to each other is expected due to the FargoRatings being higher for males than
females.

    In general, many males, especially at higher FargoRatings, have a larger number of games in the system than
most females, but this is simply because they are playing in more leagues or tournaments. Better players generally
play competitively more often because they have a better chance to do well in competition, and they also like to
challenge themselves against other competitive players. There are also fewer female games, even at the top level,
partly because there are many more Open (Men’s) tournaments than Women’s tournaments. Also, even when
females enter Open tournaments, they do not go as deep or play as many matches since they are not as competitive
as the males.

Billiards Digest                                           8                                                 May 2025
                                    Number of Games a Different FargoRatings

    It is also interesting to look at players that fall within different ranges of game numbers, even though the number
of games in the system does not necessarily correlate with ability level. One interesting category of players is those
with only 200-500 games in the system. We could generally classify them as “recreational;” although, there are also
some elite players in this range. The average female rating in the 200-500 game range is 342, which is much lower
(by 121) than the average male rating of 463. So apparently, “recreational” males also play much better than
“recreational” females. Another interesting category is “experienced” players with more than 3000 games in the
system. The average female rating in this category is 512, which is still lower (by 76) than the average male rating of
588. Again, “experienced” males also play much better than “experienced” females; but not by as wide a margin as
“recreational” players.

      Caution should be exercised when making conclusions based on the numbers of games in the FargoRate system.
It is obvious that playing more will generally make you a better player, but the number of games in the FargoRate
system is not a good general indicator of playing experience. What makes a player better is dedicated and smart
practice outside of league and tournament play. Also, some top players do not have many games in the FargoRate
system because they do not compete in many FargoRate-participating tournaments, as is the case with many Asian
players who do not travel internationally often. Also, some players with low ratings have many games in the system.
And people who have been in the system longer will generally have more games in the system, regardless of what
their rating might be.

Billiards Digest                                            9                                                   May 2025
Physical Advantages of Males Over Females in Pool
     Due to muscle physiology differences
(stronger and faster muscles), males outperform
females in sports involving throwing, jumping,
running, lifting, and swimming. The data on this is           Track and Field
clear. For example, see the Track and Field                   Men and Women World Records
World Records in the sidebar. In pool, strength
and speed are not critically important factors, but
they do make a difference. For the reasons                       Event              Women               Men
covered in the remainder of the article, males                   100 Meters          10.49s             9.58s
                                                                 400 Meters          47.60s            43.03s
generally have an advantage in pool. These
                                                                 800 Meters         1:53.28s           1:42.67
advantages can be especially important at a
                                                                 High Jump           2.10m             2.45m
higher playing level, where very small differences
                                                                 Long Jump           7.52m             8.95m
in ability can have a large impact on match
                                                                 Shot Put *         22.63m              23.56
outcomes. This is the case with a high level of
                                                                 Javelin Throw *    72.28m              98.48
play in all sports and games, where most top
athletes or players have very similar ability levels.        *: Note – The implements are lighter for Women,
                                                                       making it easier to throw them.

     Below are some of the physical advantages a male has related to pool.

A.) Muscle Speed
    Males generally have more strength and faster-twitch muscles than females, making it easier to execute
power shots. The break shot is very important and can often be the deciding factor in a high-level match. Faster
break shot speed, with accuracy, generally results in a better ball spread with a greater chance to pocket a ball. Per
break statistics from professional tournament matches (see drdavepoolinfo.com/faq/break/stats/), pros with good
breaks win games more often. The key to success with the break is using as much speed as possible without losing
too much accuracy or cue ball (CB) control. Male muscle physiology seems to be better suited to this, as evidenced
by top male pro pool players being very effective with break shot accuracy at speeds significantly higher than top pro
female pool players. This pattern is also evident in amateur pool leagues.

    In the game of 9-ball, where modern tournament break rules (with the 9 racked on the spot, breaking from the
box) result in a cut break strategy, power is less of a factor than it once was. The break speeds used in these
tournaments is well within the accurate range of top female pros. Maybe we will see females being competitive in
World Nine-ball Tour (WNT) events in the future. I certainly hope so.

    Other power shots are also important. A good example is a long draw shot, where a low and accurate tip position
and significant cue speed are required to position the CB. A typical male with good skills can execute these shots with
less effort compared to a typical female. And for any shots requiring fast speed, if you can generate more cue
speed with less effort, which is the case if you have stronger and faster muscles like males, you will generally be
more accurate and have better control and consistency. With more effort, there is more of a chance for stroke
fundamentals to break down, resulting in the cue not being delivered as straight.

     All pool players lose accuracy as they increase effort and cue speed beyond a certain range, especially as they
get closer to the maximum speed they can generate. It is simply more difficult to keep everything still and aligned
perfectly when you are exerting effort to accelerate the cue. The relationship between shot accuracy and shot speed
is also present in other sports like golf, bowling, and tennis. Beyond a certain range of shot speeds, as you use more
effort in an attempt to hit or throw a ball with more speed, you will be less accurate with shot direction and distance
control. And if you can generate faster speed with less effort, accuracy will be better. Anybody who has played pool
or any of these other sports competitively can relate to this effect.

Billiards Digest                                            10                                                   May 2025
B.) Height
    Males are generally taller, which can offer advantages in pool. First, being taller allows you to reach more shots
with greater ease and without needing a “mechanical bridge,” use of which often results in less accuracy and control.
Second, being taller gives you a better view of the arrangement and angle relationships among the balls on the table.
This makes it easier to see the cut angles required to pocket balls. It can also make it easier to see strategic ball-
pocketing patterns and be able to visualize CB paths.

    However, since many top pro pool players are short, it seems that height is not as big a factor as some people
might think. Shane VanBoening (5’11”, middle in left photo), one of the greatest American players of all time, towers
over many other pro players and he is not very tall, especially compared to Mike Massey (6’5”, left in left photo) and
me (6’3”, right in left photo). Alex Pagulayan (5’3”, right photo next to me) is short and yet he is one of the greatest
players of all time.

                                  Being tall is not an indicator of pro pool success

    But height also comes with disadvantages in pool. The effort required to bend down and hold a stance on every
shot is fatiguing and can lead to many issues. I did a series of videos with a respected sports physical therapist a
couple of years ago demonstrating exercises and stretches to help prevent and treat 10 common pool-related physical
ailments (see drdavepoolinfo.com/faq/advice/exercise/). I have personally experienced 8 of these 10 ailments over
the years, mostly due to my height and the need to bend and twist so much to get low on shots for accuracy.

C.) Hand Size
     Males generally have larger hands with longer and stronger fingers, making it easier to elevate the bridge
hand with more stability. A taller bridge enables one to more effectively reach over obstacle balls. It also enables a
longer stroke length with an elevated bridge, which is particularly helpful with jacked-up shots requiring speed,
including jump and power massé shots. But again, as mentioned above, many pro pool players are not very tall and
do not have very large hands or long fingers, so any potential disadvantages associated with being short with small
hands can apparently be easily overcome.

Billiards Digest                                             11                                                   May 2025
Other Potential Contributing Factors
   There are many factors that contribute to playing pool at a high level. Below is a list of some of the things
most top players have in common. They:

          a. have dedicated much of their life to practicing and playing pool.

          b. have tremendous focus and intensity when playing.

          c.       have developed a wealth of experience and intuition through countless hours of smart practice and
                   successful play.

          d. have good eye-hand coordination and can consistently and accurately align and deliver the cue along the
             desired line with the tip contact point and speed required.

          e. have good visual acuity (good eyes or corrected vision) and visual perception, being able to clearly and
             consistently see the angles of shots and the required lines of aim.

          f.       have been around, watched, played, and learned from many top players.

          g. have very strong desire, dedication, and drive to improve and win.

          h. are fearless but are also aware of their limitations.

          i.       are willing to travel and play often in many tournament or gambling matches against players who will
                   challenge them to their limits and beyond.

          j.       have the mental and physical stamina necessary to play with excellence over the long hours required in
                   tournament and gambling formats.

     Currently, most female players do not have the same opportunities, level of experience, exposure to, or level of
ability concerning some of the items above. This is reflected in the FargoRating differences discussed earlier.
Beyond the physical advantages described in the previous section, here are some additional possible factors that
might contribute to the current performance differences between males and females:

          a. Males generally have more opportunities, experiences, and encouragement during childhood with
             activities (sports, physical play, building and taking things apart, video games, etc.) that help improve eye-
             hand coordination and visualization skills.

          b. There have been studies showing that males generally have better 3D perception and visual-spatial
             skills than females. It is not clear if the cause of this is biological or societal; but these skills are critical in
             pool, especially for aiming, so any differences in this area are important.

          c.       Males potentially have evolutionary benefits from historically being hunters (which required good spatial
                   perception, planning, singular focus, stoicism, fearlessness, etc.) rather than nurturers and gatherers.

          d. Many amateur females playing pool are casual or social players, and many of them play simply
             because they have a boyfriend or husband who has a passion for pool. Because these females are likely
             not as serious about the game, their performance would be expected to be lower.

          e. Far fewer females then males play the sport. This is due to many potential factors including the lack of
             female role models and the uninviting atmosphere they often face in the male-dominated and sometimes
             disrespectful environment of pool halls, where males often:
                 • offer unwelcomed and unhelpful “advice” assuming the females do not know how to play,
                 • tease them about “breaking like a girl,”
                 • “hit” on them, and
                 • do other things to make them feel discouraged, uncomfortable, or unwelcome.

Billiards Digest                                                 12                                                      May 2025
Conclusions
    Based on the FargoRate data, males currently play pool at a much higher level than females, at all levels of
experience. This might in part be due to the number of players involved. Many more males than females play pool,
so there will obviously be more who play better. However, males also have slight physical and other possible
advantages. Probably the biggest difference, other than societal, is muscle physiology (more fast-twitch muscle fibers
in males) allowing for cue speed to be created with less effort, especially with power shots. This potentially allows
males to be more accurate and consistent when faster cue speed is used.

     Even though women have greater potential to improve by playing against men in more-competitive Open
divisions, separate and protected Female divisions are important. A Female division encourages more females to
enter and compete, and more females need to compete to attempt to “level the playing field” over time. If females
have less likelihood of placing well in an Open division, they will have less incentive to enter. It is not practical to have
a separate division for transgender women due to the limited number of participants and the time and costs involved,
but both transgender women and biological females are allowed and should be encouraged and supported to
compete in Open (Men’s) divisions.

     Since a transgender woman still has the genes, muscle physiology, societal upbringing, spatial and visual
perception skills, and other potential benefits of being born and raised male (especially after undergoing male
puberty), she should not be allowed to compete in female-only events based on the data and arguments presented in
this article. If the day comes when the level of play of females is on par with males, the question is moot since
Female divisions would no longer be required.

    I tried to get input from five current top female pros about allowing transgender women to participate in female
events. Unfortunately, none of them had an opinion or were willing to share views on a topic so sensitive and
controversial in today’s world. I don’t blame them. If you want to see alternative perspectives on gender in pool, see
Mike Page’s video and the other content at drdavepoolinfo.com/faq/mental/gender-in-pool/.

     Concerning my experience with the trial, see the next page.

PS: I want to thank Mike Page and Bob Jewett who offered excellent suggestions when reviewing an early draft of the
article. Thanks guys!

Billiards Digest                                              13                                                    May 2025
        Dr. Dave’s Experience with the Case, as an Expert Witness supporting the EBPF

               I was hired as an “Expert Witness” based on my background dealing with the physics of pool, my
               experience teaching and playing the game, and my general knowledge of cue sports. The first task
               was writing a technical report documenting data and explanations for why males perform at a higher
               level than females in the game of pool. There were four experts on the case, two on each side
               dealing with sports biomechanics, physiology, and gender, and two (me included) dealing with the
               physics of the game. My counterpart was an MIT physicist professor I refer to as “Dr. MIT.” Unlike in
               the US, expert witnesses in the UK are asked to discuss and debate the individual reports and write
               a joint report summarizing all areas of agreement and disagreement, along with all reasons for
               differing opinions. I think this is a much better approach than in the US, where all the “dirty laundry”
               is saved for the trial. Dr. MIT and I had many excellent discussions and debates leading to our joint
               report. Soon before the case, we both also submitted supplemental reports addressing lingering
               concerns from the joint report.

               The entire process up to this point was relatively relaxed and cordial; although, there was a little
               stress at times created by “surprise deadlines.” But during the trial (April 7-11), the “gloves” came
               off, and it was time to attack as fiercely as possible. Dr. MIT and I appeared remotely via video
               conference. Unfortunately for Dr. MIT, I knew a lot more about pool than he did, and this became a
               problem for him and his side during testimony. The lead attorney on my side did a good job
               “exposing his vulnerabilities,” making some of his work look like “rubbish.”

               The time zone difference between Colorado and London is significant, so I had to be online at 3am
               two days in a row, ready to carefully listen and take notes during testimony by the other
               experts. And on the second day, I had to endure 3 straight hours of questioning, mostly cross-
               examination by the claimant attorney with continual attempts to discredit or attack things I had
               written before the trial or said earlier in the testimony. It felt like enemy interrogation, and I had to be
               extremely careful with everything I said, attempting to anticipate what attack might be disguised in a
               sometimes-innocent-sounding question. Regardless, I very much enjoyed the entire expert witness
               process from start to finish, and I hope I get a chance to do it again in the future.

               The only thing I didn’t like about the experience is we will not know the verdict for up to 2
               months. The judge needs to review mountains of reports and evidence, review all pertinent law
               associated with the discrimination claims, and take everything (including all the evidence and expert
               testimony presented in court) into consideration before coming to his final verdict. I expect my side
               (the EBPF) will come out on top and not be found guilty of discrimination by excluding Harriet
               Haynes from competing against biological females in the Ladies division, but you never know which
               way a judge might lean in such controversial cases. I think I did my best to explain and present data
               on why males (and transgender females) have a significant advantage, mostly with the break shot.

Billiards Digest                                                 14                                                     May 2025
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/golden_break.pdf
title: Golden Break
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
“Golden Break!”                                                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    A “golden break” is where you pocket the 9 “on the snap” for an early game victory. Sometimes, this occurs
due to blind luck, but there are several techniques that can improve your chances with skill and knowledge.
Below, I summarize all the approaches demonstrated in my recent YouTube video (NV L.5) covering this topic.

     First, let’s take a brief look at standard 9-ball break strategy from online video NV J.74. As shown in Image
1, with no special rules in effect, most pros use a side break, where the cue ball (CB) is placed close to the side
rail. With a good rack and a square hit, you will pocket the near wing ball (the 8 in Image 1). With the right
speed, it is easy to get a look at the 1 in either upper corner, based on break speed.

                                   Image 1 Standard 9-ball break strategy

     As illustrated in Image 2, one golden break approach is a cut break, where you hit the 1 non-square to send
the CB off the side rail into the stationary 9, to pocket it in the corner or side. Obviously, this approach works
only if the balls are racked tightly, ensuring the 9 doesn’t move much or at all with the initial hit on the 1. For
advice on how to get a tight rack, see the “how to get a tight rack” break resource page at
billiards.colostate.edu. As demonstrated in online video NV L.5, the 9 can go in the corner or the side, the
CB can carom off another ball and still pocket the 9, and the 9 can be banked cross-side or cross-corner.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    September, 2023
                                       Image 2 Cut break from the box

    As shown in Image 3, another approach is to hit the 1 squarely from close to the center of the table to
combo the back ball (the 8) into the 9. This can pocket the 9 in the side or the upper corner. As with the cut
break, this approach works only if the 9 remains nearly stationary during the initial hit on the 1. In online video
NV L.5, I show many examples of pocketing the 9 in both pockets.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    September, 2023
                                   Image 3 Back-ball-combo golden break

     One advantage of the back-ball-combo approach is the 8 is also natural to kiss off the 9 to go in the opposite
side. In Image 4, I am showing this with my trusty 30° rule peace sign. As demonstrated in the video, a wide
range of hits on the 9 will send the 8 to the side. Also, if you hit the 1 with too much angle, it is equivalent to
breaking from the side with a square hit, so the wing ball goes in the corner as expected. And with even more
cut on the 1, you can pocket the wing ball and the 1 in the side. And with a fuller hit on the 1, but still with a
slight cut, the 1 can also go to the upper corner. All these cases are also demonstrated in the video. The
problem with the back-ball-combo approach is that often, even with a good hit, the 8 doesn’t go, the 9 doesn’t
go, and nothing else goes, potentially leaving your opponent with an easy runout.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    September, 2023
                                 Image 4 Natural back ball kiss into the side

     A final way to get a golden break is if there are gaps in the rack behind the 9. Sometimes gaps in the rack
are difficult to avoid, and it is helpful to be able to read a rack to your advantage. Image 5 from the Video
Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT) illustrates this approach. With a gap between the 6&9, the 9
ball has room to kiss off the 7 toward the corner. Breaking from the same side of the table as the gap, in this
case on the 6 side, gives the best chance to pocket the 9. The CB will send energy through the 1 and 3 into
the 9 so it can kiss off the 7. The gap between the 6&9 gives the 6 just enough time to clear. The ideal CB
direction will depend on the gap size and other gaps in the rack; but in general, try shooting from the “box” along
a line between the 1st and 2nd diamonds on the head rail, as shown.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    September, 2023
                                     Image 5 Gap-behind-the-9 golden break

     I hope you enjoyed my summary of the various techniques for getting a “golden break.” Hopefully, they will
let you get “lucky” more often against less-knowledgeable opponents.

      Good luck with your game from Dr. Dave.

                   NV J.74 – Best Pool BREAK SHOTS of All Time in 9-ball, 10-ball, and 8-ball
   normal video    NV L.5 – How to Make the 9 ON THE BREAK … It’s Not Just Luck

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       September, 2023
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/good_timing_in_pool.pdf
title: Good Timing In Pool
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Good Timing in Pool”                                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Do you have “good timing” in pool? Recently, I spent some time with pro player Demetrius Jelatis of the
Minnesota Pool Boot Camp to film some YouTube instructional videos together. One video dealt with what it
means to have “good timing” in pool (see online video NV J.103). This article summarizes the important
points.

      Different people mean different things by “good timing” in pool, but the most common interpretation
concerns the stroke. A stroke with “good timing” has a slow back swing, a non-rushed transition between the
back and forward swings, smooth acceleration forward, and no slowing before cue ball (CB) contact. There
are some fun phrases that can help you remember the “timing” of a good stroke, where the first part of the
phrase pertains to the backstroke, the middle “and” refers to the non-rushed transition, and the last part
pertains to the smooth, acclerating forward stroke. Mark Wilson likes to say: “Ladies … and … gentlemen.”
My co-Billiard University instructor Samm Diep likes to say: “Peanut butter … and … jelly.” I prefer: “Back
slow … and … accelerate.” I know my phrase isn’t as fun, but it contains the important instructions, which I
like.

    Diagram 1 compares a good, “smoothly accelerating” stroke to several common “bad timing” strokes.
The graph shows how cue speed (vertical axis) changes with time (horizontal axis) from the beginning of the
forward swing (left) to tip contact with the CB (right). A stroke with “good timing” starts forward slowly and
smoothly accelerates to maximum speed at the CB. People who rush the backswing transition or who try to
create speed too quickly have a “rushed or impulsive” stroke. People who generate speed early but then slow
down into the CB have a “decelerating” stroke. People who generate speed early and try to keep the speed
constant over a long distance into the CB have a “constant speed” stroke. Again, the green “smooth
acceleration” curve represents “good timing.”

                                      Diagram 1 Stroke timing graph

Billiards Digest                                                                                     April, 2022
     As shown in Image 1, Demetrius likes to push the CB with the shaft to demonstrate the differences
among the various stroke types. See NV J.103 for the demonstrations in action. With a “smoothly
accelerating stroke,” the shaft gradually pushes the CB forward without any big changes in force. With a
“rushed stroke,” the player tries to generate the speed too quickly and loses contact between the shaft and
the CB. With a “decelerating stroke,” the player slows the cue down prematurely and the shaft doesn’t remain
engaged with the CB. With a “constant speed” stroke, the player tries to establish the desired speed early
and maintain it during the whole stroke. Some people can be effective with this approach, but most people
will have better and more consistent speed control with a smoothly accelerating stroke where they vary the
stroke length with shot speed.

                                  Image 1 Demetrius shaft push analogy

     Another technique flaw that can also be considered “bad timing” is dropping the elbow during the forward
stroke into the CB. I cover this topic in detail in my “10 Secrets of a Good Stroke” video (see NV J.66). If you
drop your elbow, you will not hit the CB at the height you expect. It is okay to drop your elbow if you can drop
it straight and do so mostly after the hit. One problem with elbow drop for some people is that other bad
things often come with it like wrist turn and chicken-wing sideways motion. The recommended type of stroke
is called a “pendulum stroke,” where the shoulder and elbow remain still and only the forearm moves (like a
pendulum). In Image 2, the elbow at the end of the stroke is in the same position as at the beginning and
during the entire stroke, as if it were “pinned.”

                                       Image 2 Still or pinned elbow
Billiards Digest                                                                                       April, 2022
    Another form of “bad timing” deals with the eyes and head. With a good eye pattern, you lock your eyes
on the object ball (OB) before the final stroke so you have still laser focus during the shot. The final pause in
the stroke at the CB gives you a chance to lock and steady the eyes before the final forward stroke. NV J.103
demonstrates an example of a bad eye pattern, where the eyes move quickly between the CB and OB while
the cue is moving back and forth, and there is no careful lock on the target before the final stroke. A related
type of “bad timing” is getting up too early on the shot. Another is moving your head or eyes too soon to
watch the shot. Instead, if you keep your head, body, and eyes still during and after the shot, you will have
better and more consistent results.

     You can also have “bad timing” with your pre-shot routine. As already mentioned, pausing at the CB is
important to give your eyes time to settle and lock onto the target before the final stroke. Not pausing at the
CB also tends to cause the backswing to be rushed, which can throw off the timing for the entire stroke. The
pause at the CB not only gives your eyes time to focus; it also encourages you to go back slowly and
smoothly to begin good stroke timing. Generally, it is best to keep the cue still while you check the aim and
tip position carefully, use warm-up strokes to get loose and to judge the desired stroke length while also
making sure the cue stays straight during motion, and then pause at the CB again to lock and settle the eyes
while you start with your good stroke timing.

    As mentioned before, another source of bad stroke timing is rushing the backswing and the transition
between the back and forward swings. As demonstrated in the video, for people who rush the transition, it
can help to add a deliberate pause at the end of the backswing. For people who rush the backswing, it can
also help to add the pause at the CB.

   I hope this article and online video NV J.103 help you be more aware of and improve your timing in pool.
Be sure to watch the video so you can see everything in action. And be sure to practice with all the topics
covered, especially the ones that might be issues for you.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.66 – 10 Secrets of a GOOD STROKE in Pool
normal video
                    NV J.103 – GOOD TIMING in Pool … What Does It Mean?

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        April, 2022
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/got_english.pdf
title: Got English
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Got English?”                                                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference
numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Recently, I came out with a T-shirt containing the image in Diagram 1. Some people have suggested
that the “Got English?” title might offend foreign nationals (or others) who don’t speak English very well; but
obviously, with the pool shot diagram and physics equations on the shirt, this should not be the case. Here,
“English” refers to sidespin, and the shirt illustrates the important effects of squirt, swerve, and throw that
occur when hitting the cue ball (CB) off center.

    Squirt, also called CB deflection, refers to the sideways motion of the CB caused by an off-center hit.
Instead of the CB going straight in the direction of the cue, it goes off at an initial squirt angle. The amount of
squirt depends on the properties of the shaft and the amount of sidespin. Swerve is the curving of the CB’s
path in the opposite direction from squirt. Swerve depends on shot speed and distance, cue elevation, and
cloth conditions. The combined effect of squirt and swerve is sometimes called squerve or “net CB
deflection.” Throw refers to the sideways push of the object ball (OB) off the expected “line of centers”
direction due to friction between the CB and OB. Throw is caused by relative sliding motion between the balls
during contact due to cut angle (called “cut-induced throw” or CIT) or sidespin (called “spin-induced throw” or
SIT).

                                  Diagram 1 “Got English?” T-Shirt design

Billiards Digest                                                                                    September, 2018
      The T-shirt includes accurate physics-based math equations that predict all squirt, swerve, and throw
effects in complete detail. For the physics nerds out there, complete derivations of the equations can be
found in online Technical Proofs TP A.4, TP A.14, and TP A.31. I put the equations on the shirt mostly to be
silly, but some people might actually appreciate them. They are also good conversation starters.

     New online video NV J.9 demonstrates the T-shirt effects and shows the basics of how to adjust your aim
for squirt, swerve, and throw when using sidespin. The video also contains demonstrations of numerous
interesting game-situation english examples where the aiming techniques are applied. Back-hand english
(BHE) and front-hand english (FHE) techniques are featured in the video. More information related to the
BHE/FHE techniques can be found in the “english” section of the FAQ page at billiards.colostate.edu.

    This article provides a concise summary of all important squirt, swerve, and throw effects that must be
taken into consideration (consciously, or intuitively based on extensive experience) when aiming shots with
sidespin. Supporting video demonstrations, articles and other info for each item in the list below can be found
under “squirt, swerve, and throw effects” in the “english” section of the FAQ page at billiards.colostate.edu.

                                  Squirt, Swerve, and Throw Effects
     Squirt:
          1. Squirt increases with the amount of sidespin.

          2. Squirt does not depend on shot speed; although, squerve (see below) does.

          3. Squirt increases with the amount of shaft “endmass” (e.g., a low-squirt cue has less endmass and
             results in less squirt).

          4. Squirt is slightly less with a heavier CB and slightly more with a lighter CB.

     Swerve:
          5. Swerve increases with cue elevation and the amount of sidespin.

          6. Swerve occurs with practically all sidespin shots because the cue must be elevated to clear the
             rails.

          7. Swerve is delayed with faster shot speed.

          8. Swerve occurs only while the CB is sliding; once rolling begins, the CB heads in a straight line.

          9. Swerve occurs earlier with sticky cloth and later on slick cloth.

          10. Swerve occurs earlier with a follow shot than with a draw shot.

          11. Swerve angle is larger with a draw shot than with a follow shot.

          12. Swerve angle can be predicted and visualized using the Coriolis massé-shot aiming system.

     Squerve:
          13. Squerve (net effect of squirt and swerve = net CB deflection) can be zero with certain speeds and
              cue elevations for a given shot distance, amount of sidespin, and cue.

          14. Squerve is less for follow vs. draw shots.

          15. Squirt or squerve can be canceled using a combination of BHE and FHE.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   September, 2018
     Throw:
          16. For small cut angle shots (i.e., fuller hits), the amount of CIT does not vary with shot speed, but
              increases with cut angle.

          17. For larger cut angle shots (i.e., thinner hits), the amount of CIT is significantly larger for slower
              speed shots as compared to faster speed shots.

          18. The amount of CIT decreases some with larger cut angles, but not by much (especially for slower
              speed shots).

          19. Maximum CIT occurs at close to a half-ball hit (30-degree cut angle).

          20. In general, throw is larger at slower speeds, and for stun shots.

          21. Maximum throw, under typical conditions, is about 1 inch per foot of OB travel, or 1/2 a ball per
              diamond on a 9' table, which is about 5 degrees.

          22. Excessive throw (more than the amount expected) can occur if there is cling/skid/kick.

          23. Both follow and draw reduce throw, and they do so by the same amount.

          24. Effective throw (combined effect of throw and OB swerve) can be slightly larger with follow vs.
              draw shots, especially at slower speeds (and with cling/skid/kick).

          25. The largest discrepancy between throw values for stun and follow/draw shots occurs close to a
              half-ball hit (30-degree cut angle).

          26. The difference between the throw of stun and follow/draw shots is not as great at larger cut
              angles.

          27. More sidespin gives you more SIT only up to a point. Additional sidespin beyond that point
              actually reduces the amount of SIT (i.e., more sidespin doesn't always give you more throw).

          28. SIT is largest for a slow stun shot with about 50% of maximum sidespin.

          29. The amount of throw can increase significantly as a small amount of sidespin is added, especially
              for a stun shot.

          30. SIT is independent of speed (i.e., the throw is the same at all speeds) for small amounts of
              sidespin.

          31. "Gearing" outside english (OE) results in absolutely no throw. The amount of sidespin required for
              "gearing" increases with cut angle. At a half-ball hit, the amount of sidespin required is about
              50%.

          32. At very small cut angles, inside english (IE) and OE create similar amounts of throw (although, in
              opposite directions).

          33. For large cut angles, a small amount of OE can result in more throw than shots with no sidespin.

          34. For large cut angles, IE results in less throw than shots with no sidespin.

          35. IE increases throw at small cut angles, but actually reduces the amount of throw at larger cut
              angles.

          36. OE can cause throw in either direction depending on the amount of sidespin and the cut angle.

          37. Even for large cut angle shots (thin hits), excess OE (more than the "gearing" amount) can be
              applied to throw the OB in the SIT direction.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    September, 2018
               38. The amount of throw with IE can be much more consistent than with OE if the amount of sidespin
                   varies a little. In other words, the amount of throw varies more with tip placement for OE vs. IE.
                   This might explain why some people prefer using IE on cut shots ... because they can better
                   anticipate and adjust for the amount of throw.

               39. The least amount of throw, and the most throw consistency, occurs with fast IE shots.

               40. With a small-gap combo with a gap size close to 3/8" (9.5mm), the 2nd ball heads very straight
                   (i.e., the throw effect cancels the cut effect) over a fairly wide range of 1st-ball angles, regardless
                   of ball conditions.

     That’s 40 different effects that come into play when aiming pool shots! This is one of the things that
makes pool so interesting and challenging (… and frustrating at times). Obviously, to develop and master
intuition for all of these effects can take a lifetime, and only if you learn from all of your mistakes. Based on
countless years of successful experience, top players instinctively know how to compensate for squirt,
swerve, and throw, and they aim and align their cue in the required direction based on shot speed, distance,
amount and type of spin, and conditions. Hopefully, some of the simple techniques presented in online video
NV J.9 might help you become more effective immediately and help speed up your learning journey, without
needing to know and understand the entire list of effects.

    If you want a “Got English?” T-shirt, it is available for sale at DrDaveBilliards.com. The shirt is fun for
the pool nerds out there like me. When an opponent misses a shot due to lack of understanding of important
sidespin effects, you can just point at one of the equations on the shirt. They’ll love it. Just don’t get “beat up
after class.”

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.9 – "Got English?" – How to Aim Using Sidespin, With Game-Situation Examples
normal video

                    TP A.4 – Post-impact CB trajectory for any cut angle, speed, and spin
                    TP A.14 – The effects of cut angle, speed, and spin on OB throw
technical proof     TP A.31 – The physics of squirt

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                           September, 2018
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/half_ball_hit_magic.pdf
title: Half Ball Hit Magic
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Half-Ball Hit Magic”                                                        ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     As illustrated in Image 1, a ½-ball hit is a 30° cut angle, where the center of the cue ball (CB) is aimed at
the edge of the object ball (OB). From the shooter’s perspective, the CB overlaps or eclipses half the OB. This
article covers 10 reasons why the ½-ball hit is so important and useful. All 10 reasons are also demonstrated
in online video NV L.39.

                                               Image 1 ½-ball hit

1 – Easy to Aim
     The best thing about a ½-ball hit is how easy it is to aim. You just need to point your cue through the center
of the CB right at the edge of the OB, which is very easy to see and focus on.

2 – Good Angle
    A ½-ball hit is also a good angle to leave for CB control and position play shots. The angle is not too big to
make the shot difficult, but it is big enough to easily move the CB around the table in different directions. The
video demonstrates a useful target drill that convincingly shows the positional powers of the ½-ball hit.

3 – Equal Separation
    An important ½-ball-hit principle is that the CB and OB separate at equal angles and equal speeds. You
actually need to hit just a hair thinner than ½-ball for this to work best. Again, the video demonstrates this and
shows several game-situations where the technique is useful, especially in playing lock-up safeties.

4 – Natural Angle
    One nice feature of a ½-ball hit is the carom angle is very constant with small changes in cut angle. This
makes it very easy to predict ½-ball-hit carom direction in a wide range of game situations, as demonstrated in
the video.

Billiards Digest                                      1                                                   April, 2024
5 - 30° Rule
    The most powerful ½-ball-hit principle is the 30° rule illustrated in Image 2. The rule states that a rolling-
CB caroms off close to 30° over a wide range of cut angles between a ¼-ball and ¾-ball hit. Even though these
three shots have radically different cut angles, the CB carom direction is very close to 30° for all three.

                                                 Image 2 30° rule

6 – Peace Sign
    A peace sign can be very useful to accurately visualize the CB carom direction for a rolling-ball shot close
to a ½-ball hit. As illustrated in Image 3, if you point one finger in the initial CB direction, the other finger will
point in the final CB direction. The angle template linked in the YouTube video description can help you calibrate
your peace sign. For most people, a firm but slightly relaxed peace sign forms an angle very close to 30°.
Learn this angle first since it is a good average value over the entire ¼-ball to ¾-ball-hit range. And if you want
to be more accurate predicting CB direction, also learn the slightly larger angle for the ½-ball hit and the slightly
smaller angle for ¼-ball and ¾-ball hits.

                                          Image 3 30° rule peace sign

Billiards Digest                                        2                                                   April, 2024
7 – Reliable Carom
    As demonstrated in the video, being able to predict carom direction accurately is very useful in a wide
variety of game situations including billiard and kiss shots, and safeties.

8 – Draw 90° Rule
    There is also a useful-to-know ½-ball-hit principle for draw shots. As shown in Image 4, with “good action”
draw, the CB will change direction by 90°. This is a result of the useful 3-times-the-angle system linked in the
YouTube video description. Because a ½-ball hit is a 30° cut angle, three times that is 90°. It is possible to
draw slightly better than this, but it is not easy, so it is a good challenge drill.

                                        Image 4 Good action draw shot

9 – Safe Propositions
     It is easy to come up with fun proposition shots that take advantage of the natural angle of the ½-ball hit.
Bet somebody that with CB in hand, you can carom off a ball on the foot spot and scratch in the corner 10 times
in a row. A potential “fish” might think this is difficult and take the bet. If you have a well-calibrated peace sign,
the proposition bet is a sure thing. Just put the CB along the perfect line, where the natural angle heads straight
to the heart of the pocket. Obviously, it is best to find this position and test it out before making the bet.

      If nobody wants to take the first bet, move the OB to the center of the table and bet you can scratch from
there 5 times in a row. Again, if you know where to put the CB, the bet is still a sure thing. And if your “fish”
still demands more, bet you can scratch 3 times in a row, shooting with only 1 hand with the CB frozen to the
head rail. Surely, no “fish” will think this is possible. Again, if you find the best CB position, even this bet is a
sure thing. All three proposition bets are demonstrated in the video.

Billiards Digest                                        3                                                   April, 2024
10 – Bank Double Kiss
     A final useful principle with ½-ball hits concerns avoiding a double kiss with a bank of a rail-frozen ball.
When the OB is a little more than a diamond from the target pocket, the bank is on the verge of a double kiss
when shooting perpendicular to the rail with a ½-ball hit. At fast speed, the ½-ball-hit bank goes. But at slower
speeds, there is a double kiss, causing a miss. This principle can help you figure out other shots too. For
example, if the hit is fuller than ½-ball, the double kiss cannot be avoided, even at fast speed. With a thinner
hit, you still need speed to avoid the double hit, but not as much as with the ½-ball hit. When the OB is higher
up on the rail, the bank calls for a thinner hit, so the double kiss is less of a concern, but you still need enough
speed to enable the OB to compress the cushion enough to clear. Even higher up the rail, the OB can clear
even at slow speed.

     Again, everything is demonstrated in detail in online video NV L.39, where the ten useful principles are
applied to a wide range of interesting game-situation examples. I hope you now have a better appreciation for
the importance and usefulness of the ½-ball hit. Hopefully, some of the principles will help you win more games
… and bets!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV L.39 – 10 Reasons Why the HALF-BALL HIT is so Important
   normal video

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                         4                                                  April, 2024
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/haps_part_i_fractional_ball_aiming.pdf
title: HAPS Part I Fractional Ball Aiming
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“HAPS: Part I: Fractional-Ball Aiming”                                      ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at: dr-dave-
billiards.com.

     This is the first article in a series dealing with “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” a three-disc instructional-DVD
collection I recently created with fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett. HAPS covers cut-shot aiming systems, how to
adjust for cut-induced throw, how to aim without guessing when using english (sidespin), and how to aim specialty
shots including caroms, kisses, combos, rail cut shots, and elevated cue shots. Also included are numerous
simple but effective systems for aiming kick and bank shots. An outline of the entire HAPS series along with
video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/aiming. Over the next few
months, I’ll present topics from the first DVD: “HAPS I - Aiming Systems, and Aiming with Sidespin.”

     This month’s article deals with “fractional-ball aiming,” which is the basis of several “aiming systems” taught
by some pool instructors. The basic concept is to think about all pool shots in terms of what is called “ball-hit
fraction.” As illustrated in bottom of Diagram 1, this is the percentage overlap of the cue ball (CB) and object ball
(OB) at contact. It can help to become familiar with the standard ball-hit fractions of ¼, ½, and ¾ because they
can be useful as visual references. As shown in Diagram 1b, with a ½-ball hit, the CB overlaps ½ of the OB, and
the center of the CB is aimed exactly at the edge of the OB. This “center to edge” (CTE) alignment makes a ½-
ball hit very easy to visualize and aim. The result is a 30° cut angle. Shots close to a ½-ball hit are very common
in typical game play because the angle is not too large to make the shot too difficult, and yet the angle is large
enough to allow a wide range of CB control options.

                                     Diagram 1 Standard Ball-Hit Fractions

Billiards Digest                                                                                   November, 2014
    With a ¼-ball hit (Diagram 1a), the CB overlaps only ¼ of the OB, creating between a 45° and 50° cut, a
relatively thin hit. Here, the CB is aimed a ¼-ball outside the edge of the OB, with the inside ¼ point of the CB
aimed at the edge of the OB. With a ¾-ball hit (Diagram 1c), the CB overlaps ¾ of the OB, creating about a 15°
cut, a relatively full hit. Here, the CB is aimed at the outside ¼ point of the OB. Again, all pool shots can be
categorized as close to or between each of these benchmark shots. And this categorizing can help some people
develop their aiming ability more quickly.

     Diagram 2 shows three shots you can set up at a table if you want to practice visualizing and pocketing the
standard fractional-ball aims, with the OB on the foot spot for each shot. For the ½-ball hit, the CB is located on a
line through the edge of the OB and the inner part of the corner pocket. At the table, it helps to mark each ball
position with a self-adhesive hole-reinforcement label (a “little white donut”). A ¼-ball hit can be created by
placing the CB at the center of the table. To locate the CB position for a ¾-ball hit, first place a donut anywhere
along the line from the side pocket to the corner. You can use your cue to help visualize this line. Then place a
donut exactly between this donut and the ½-ball hit donut. That locates the required CB position for a ¾-ball hit.
Online video NV E.1 demonstrates the details of how to quickly and easily set up and practice these standard
ball-hit-fraction shots at a table. On the HAPS-I DVD, we show how you can use your hands and cue to
approximate cut angles and ball-hit fractions at the table, and we show examples of how this technique can be
applied while aiming shots over a wide range of angles, using the standard ball-hit fractions as references.

                                   Diagram 2 Ball-Hit Fraction Practice Shots

     Diagram 3 relates a clock-face to the standard fractional-ball aims and other cut angles. A clock face
provides a good visual reference for angles because each hour is 30° and each half hour is 15°. Remember, a ¾-
ball hit is a cut of about 15°, a ½-ball hit is 30°, and ¼-ball hit is a few degrees more than 45°. If you could easily
identify the angle of a cut, this diagram would help show you how much of the OB you would need to hit to pocket
the shot. In fact, on the HAPS website (under Disc I in the “Online Resources” section) there is a “cut-angle
estimation” resource page that includes a template you can print and use at the table to measure cut angles. Like
Diagram 3, the template also illustrates the ball-hit fractions (amounts of CB overlap) required for a wide range of
cut angles. Using a template like this is not legal in actual play, but it can be helpful when working on improving
your aim visualization skills.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    November, 2014
                                Diagram 3 Clock-Face Illustration of Ball-Hit Fractions

   I hope you enjoy my series of articles dealing with the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS)” DVD series. If you
want to view video excerpts from the entire series, check out online videos NV E.1 through NV E.8. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV E.1 – Fractional-Ball Aiming, from HAPS I
                   NV E.2 – Back-Hand (BHE) and Front-Hand English (FHE), from HAPS I
                   NV E.3 – Using "Gearing" Outside English to Eliminate Throw, from HAPS I
                   NV E.4 – Carom-Shot Trisect-Draw System, from HAPS II
normal video
                   NV E.5 – Combination Shot Throw Adjustment, from HAPS II
                   NV E.6 – Rail Cut Shot Aiming, w/ and w/o Sidespin, from HAPS II
                   NV E.7 – Mirror Kick-Shot Aiming System, from HAPS III
                   NV E.8 – 1/3-More-Than-Twice Bank-Shot Aiming System, from HAPS III

Billiards Digest                                                                              November, 2014
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
          with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
          the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),”
“How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   November, 2014
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/haps_part_ii_bhe_and_fhe.pdf
title: HAPS Part Ii BHE And FHE
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“HAPS – Part II: BHE and FHE”                                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at: dr-dave-
billiards.com.

    This is the second article in a series dealing with “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” a three-disc instructional-
DVD collection I recently created with fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett. HAPS covers cut-shot aiming systems,
how to adjust for cut-induced throw, how to aim without guessing when using sidespin (english), and how to aim
specialty shots including caroms, kisses, combos, rail cut shots, and elevated-cue shots. Also included are
numerous simple but effective systems for aiming kick and bank shots. An outline of the entire HAPS series
along with video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/aiming.

    The month, we will look at how to adjust one’s aim for squirt and swerve when using sidespin. If you are not
very familiar with squirt and swerve, watch online video NV B.70. It provides a complete summary and
demonstrates all of the important effects. There are several useful “systems” for aiming when using sidespin. If
you are already accurate and consistent when using sidespin, you don’t need these systems. However, if you are
new to english, or if you don’t yet have a good “track record” with accuracy and consistency, these systems might
be helpful.

                                      Diagram 1 Back-Hand English (BHE)

    Diagram 1 shows one technique for compensating for squirt called back-hand english or BHE. As shown in
Diagram 1a, when you hit the CB off center, it does not go straight. It initially heads in the squirt-angle direction.
For each cue, there is a unique bridge length you can use that will allow you to aim the shot center-ball and pivot
to apply english, and the pivot will exactly cancel the squirt (see Diagrams 1b and 1c). The end result is that the

Billiards Digest                                                                                   December, 2014
cue ball (CB) will now head in the direction intended, which is a good thing. The bridge length required for a given
cue is called the “natural pivot length.” If you want to find the natural pivot point for your own cue, there are
procedures and video demonstrations for how to do this under “natural pivot length” on the “cue” FAQ page at
billiards.colostate.edu. Again, if your bridge is at the natural pivot point, when you pivot your cue to apply
english, the aiming line will cancel squirt and send the CB in the desired direction. Fixed-bridge-length BHE is
most effective either with fast speed and/or when the CB is close to the object ball (OB). With fast speed and/or
short distance, swerve is not much of a factor since the CB does not have time to curve on the way to the OB.

    For longer and slower-speed shots, another technique is more effective. It is called front-hand english or
FHE. As illustrated in Diagram 2, with FHE, you keep the back grip hand stationary while you move your front
bridge hand left or right to pivot the cue. The result is a much longer effective pivot length with correspondingly
less aim compensation. Everything else is the same as with BHE. FHE will work only with a near-level cue (in
other words, not elevated more than the amount necessary to clear the rails). The resulting swerve partially
cancels some of the squirt, and the remaining squirt is canceled by the FHE pivot. As with BHE, the method will
work regardless of the amount of english you need to apply. With more pivot, the aim is compensated more for
the additional squirt that comes with using more sidespin.

                                       Diagram 2 Front-Hand English (FHE)

     Remember, BHE works best for short and fast shots, and FHE works best for long and slow shots. For all
shots in between, you can use a combination of BHE and FHE. Diagram 3 shows the setup for a useful drill you
can use to develop a feel for when to use BHE vs. FHE vs. a combination of the two. Set up a straight shot into a
ball on the rail and try to get a perfectly square hit on the OB while using sidespin. Obviously, you would probably
never use english on a shot like this, but that’s not the point. The point is to learn and carefully test the BHE and
FHE methods. Try the drill, practicing shots from CB positions A, B and C at slow, medium and fast speeds, and
determine the appropriate combination of BHE and FHE required for each of these 9 “benchmark” shots. Position
“C” is difficult to reach on a large table, so feel free to shoot it toward the side rail instead (at the alternative ball
positions shown in top of the diagram). Online video NV E.2 and the HAPS-I DVD demonstrate selected
benchmark shots, showing how the required percentages of BHE and FHE change with shot speed and distance.
The exact percentages you will need will vary some with your preferred bridge length, the squirt (cue ball
deflection) properties of your cue, cue levelness, and cloth conditions. Try out the shots when you get a chance.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       December, 2014
                                Diagram 3 BHE/FHE Combo Benchmark Shots

    In Diagram 3, at CB position C, with fast speed, pure BHE should be appropriate, assuming your bridge is at
the natural pivot length of your cue. Also, from CB position A, with slow speed and a near-level cue, FHE should
be fairly accurate; although, the effectiveness of FHE will depend some on your cue, your height, and table
conditions. From CB position B, at medium speed, a combination of BHE and FHE, probably close to 50/50,
should be appropriate. As demonstrated in NV E.2, to apply 50% of each, start with a center-ball alignment and
move the tip halfway to the desired tip positon using a back-hand pivot, and then pivot the remaining amount by
moving the front hand only. At different CB positions and speeds, different percentages of BHE and FHE will be
required. The purpose of the drill is to help you discover these percentages based on previous benchmark shots
and based on the understanding the drill will help you develop.

    Depending on the natural pivot length of your cue, your preferred bridge length, your height, and table
conditions, you might need a small amount of BHE with long and slow shots (where FHE alone is often
appropriate), and you might need a small amount of FHE with short and fast shots (where BHE alone is often
appropriate). But that’s the beauty of the BHE/FHE combo approach. With a few benchmark shots (from the
Diagram 3 drill), you can easily see what BHE/FHE combinations work best over a wide range of shots. Then you
can take the guess work out of aiming with English. Just aim center ball, then pivot with the BHE/FHE
combination appropriate for a given shot speed and distance, and then just stroke straight.

     An alternative to using BHE and FHE is to simply bring the cue into the required line of the shot to
compensate for squirt and swerve strictly intuitively based on feel and past experience. This is what most pros
and top players do. An advantage of this approach is that the stance is not shifted once down on the shot. Slight
stance shifting occurs with BHE and FHE pivoting, especially with large amounts of sidespin. However, the
intuitive approach requires a significant amount of past practice and successful experience, and it takes a long
time to develop a complete feel for all squirt, swerve and throw effects and how they change with every type of
shot. But as you improve over time, you will learn to adjust for these things more naturally and ultimately even
subconsciously.

    NV E.2 and the HAPS-I DVD demonstrate a variety of shots where sidespin is appropriate or necessary.
These examples show how BHE, FHE, and combinations of the two are used effectively in a wide range of game
situations. If you are fairly new to using sidespin, you should give these shots a try. Although, you might consider
practicing the BHE and FHE methods first, using the Diagram 3 drill.

     If you want more information about how to compensate your aim when using sidespin, see “aim
compensation for squirt, swerve and throw” in the “aiming” FAQ page at billiards.colostate.edu. And if you want
to learn more about how, when, and why english is used in a variety of game situations, check out Disc II of the
Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS). VEPS-II takes a comprehensive look at this topic.

Billiards Digest                                                                                  December, 2014
     I hope you enjoy my series of articles dealing with the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS)” DVD set. If you want
to view video excerpts from the entire series, check out online videos NV E.1 through NV E.8. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV B.70 – Squirt (cue ball deflection), swerve, and throw, from VEPS II
                    NV E.1 – Fractional-Ball Aiming, from HAPS I
                    NV E.2 – Back-Hand (BHE) and Front-Hand English (FHE), from HAPS I
                    NV E.3 – Using "Gearing" Outside English to Eliminate Throw, from HAPS I
                    NV E.4 – Carom-Shot Trisect-Draw System, from HAPS II
normal video        NV E.5 – Combination Shot Throw Adjustment, from HAPS II
                    NV E.6 – Rail Cut Shot Aiming, w/ and w/o Sidespin, from HAPS II
                    NV E.7 – Mirror Kick-Shot Aiming System, from HAPS III
                    NV E.8 – 1/3-More-Than-Twice Bank-Shot Aiming System, from HAPS III

PS:
              I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
               with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
               the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),”
“How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        December, 2014
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/haps_part_iii_gearing_outside_english.pdf
title: HAPS Part Iii Gearing Outside English
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“HAPS – Part III: Gearing Outside English”                                 ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at: dr-dave-
billiards.com.

    This is the third article in a series dealing with “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” a three-disc instructional-
DVD collection I recently created with fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett. HAPS covers cut-shot aiming systems,
how to adjust for cut-induced throw, how to aim without guessing when using sidespin (english), and how to aim
specialty shots including caroms, kisses, combos, rail cut shots, and elevated-cue shots. Also included are
numerous simple but effective systems for aiming kick and bank shots. An outline of the entire HAPS series
along with video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/aiming.

    This month, we will look at how to deal with throw, which is motion of an object ball (OB) away from the
expected “line of centers” direction when the cue ball (CB) hits the OB with a cut angle or with sidespin. If you are
not very familiar with throw, watch online video NV B.86. It demonstrates many important throw effects. The
amount of throw varies with cut angle, speed, and spin; and with certain types of shots, if you don’t compensate
your aim for throw, you will miss the shots. A summary of all throw effects can be found in the “squirt, swerve,
and throw effects” section of the aiming FAQ page at billiards.colostate.edu, in items 16-37 in the numbered list
beneath the videos and illustrations. One way to adjust for throw is to change your aiming line to compensate for
the expected amount of throw. Disc I of HAPS shows how this is done. Another way is to use what is called
“gearing” outside english (OE). The latter approach is the topic of this article.

     Diagram 1 illustrates how throw varies with the amount of sidespin. The shot is a ½-ball hit, where the aiming
line is through the center of the CB and the outside edge of the OB. If a small amount of (or no) sidespin is used,
the OB will be undercut (see the blue arrow). In this case, the throw is called cut-induced throw (CIT) because
the spin isn’t enough to overcome the sliding motion between the CB and OB due to the cut angle. If a large
amount of sidespin is used, the OB will be overcut (see the red arrow). In this case the throw is called spin-
induced throw (SIT) because it is the excess spin that creates sliding between the balls. It turns out that there is
an specific amount of spin, called gearing OE, that causes the CB to roll along the surface of the OB during
contact as if the balls were meshing like gears. Under this condition there is no sliding between the balls, and
therefore absolutely no throw. With gearing OE, the OB will head exactly in the expected “line of centers”
direction. The english is labeled “outside” because the tip is on the outside of the direction of cut. For example,
because the OB in the diagram is being cut to the right, the tip is on the left side (outside) of the ball. HSV B.33
demonstrates each case (equal to, less than, and greater than the “gearing” amount of OE) in super slow motion
if you want to see how the balls react.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     January, 2015
                               Diagram 1 “Gearing” outside english, CIT, and SIT

     There is a simple rule for determining the tip position required to create gearing OE for a cut shot of any
angle. It is called the 40% rule, and it is illustrated in Diagram 2. Here's how it works: First imagine or use your
cue to visualize the line through the OB to the pocket. This direction defines the "line of centers" for the shot. If
you parallel-shift this line to the CB (see the red line in the diagram), that defines the "line-of-centers" point on the
CB (the red dot in the diagram). The tip contact point must be a little less than half (2/5 or 40% to be precise) of
the distance from center ball to the "line-of-centers" point to create gearing OE. This procedure and visualization
can be difficult at first attempt; but with practice, it will become easier. NV E.3 demonstrates to apply the 40% rule
at the table for the shot in Diagram 1. Check it out and give it a try. Much more information dealing with when
and how to use gearing OE can be found under “outside english” in the english (sidespin) FAQ page at
billiards.colostate.edu.

     As shown by a graph in TP A.26, every cut angle requires a different amount of sidespin to create gearing
OE, resulting in no throw. Fortunately, the 40% rule works for every cut angle. For a small cut angle (a fairly full
hit), the required amount of english will be small; and for a large cut angle (a fairly thin cut), the required amount
of english will be large. Either way, the required tip position is determined using the same procedure and
visualization techniques.

                                 Diagram 2 “Gearing” outside english 40% rule

     One thing you need to be careful with when applying the 40% rule is visualizing the contact point accurately.
As illustrated in Diagram 3, due to the roundness of the tip, the contact point is not on the line through the center
of the cue. So be careful to place the cue so the contact point, and not the center of the cue, is aligned with the

Billiards Digest                                                                                        January, 2015
required 40% tip contact-point position. NV E.3 and the HAPS-I DVD demonstrate how to visualize thist and how
to apply the method successfully at the table.

                                    Diagram 3 Tip contact point line vs. cue centerline

     If you want more information about how to compensate your aim when using sidespin, see “aim
compensation for squirt, swerve and throw” in the “aiming” FAQ page at billiards.colostate.edu. And if you want
to learn more about how, when, and why english is used in a variety of game situations, check out Disc II of the
Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS). VEPS-II takes a comprehensive look at this topic.

     I hope you enjoy my series of articles dealing with the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS)” DVD set. If you want
to view video excerpts from the entire series, check out online videos NV E.1 through NV E.8. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV B.86 – Cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT), from VEPS IV
                    NV E.1 – Fractional-Ball Aiming, from HAPS I
                    NV E.2 – Back-Hand (BHE) and Front-Hand English (FHE), from HAPS I
                    NV E.3 – Using "Gearing" Outside English to Eliminate Throw, from HAPS I
                    NV E.4 – Carom-Shot Trisect-Draw System, from HAPS II
normal video        NV E.5 – Combination Shot Throw Adjustment, from HAPS II
                    NV E.6 – Rail Cut Shot Aiming, w/ and w/o Sidespin, from HAPS II
                    NV E.7 – Mirror Kick-Shot Aiming System, from HAPS III
                    NV E.8 – 1/3-More-Than-Twice Bank-Shot Aiming System, from HAPS III

                    HSV B.33 – Outside english gearing, and cut and spin-induced throw
high-speed video

                    TP A.26 – The amount of sidespin required for "gearing" outside english
technical proof

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
               with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
               the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),”
“How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          January, 2015
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/haps_part_iv_draw_carom_shot_aiming.pdf
title: HAPS Part Iv Draw Carom Shot Aiming
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“HAPS – Part IV: Draw Carom Shot Aiming”                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at: dr-dave-
billiards.com.

     This is the fourth article in a series dealing with “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” a three-disc instructional-
DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett. HAPS covers cut-shot aiming
systems, how to adjust for cut-induced throw, how to aim without guessing when using sidespin (english), and
how to aim specialty shots including caroms, kisses, combos, rail cut shots, and elevated-cue shots. Also
included are numerous simple but effective systems for aiming kick and bank shots. An outline of the entire
HAPS series along with video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/aiming.

    This month, we will look at how to aim a “carom” shot, where the cue ball (CB) kisses off one object ball (OB)
              nd
to pocket a 2 OB. A carom shot is also sometimes called a “billiard.” The 90 degree rule (for predicting stun-
shot CB motion) and the 30 degree rule (for predicting a rolling CB’s natural angle) are very useful for aiming
certain types of carom shots. For examples, see NV B.69. A third rule called the trisect system is very useful for
                                                                                   nd
aiming draw carom shots. All three approaches are covered with examples on the 2 HAPS DVD.

     Diagram 1 illustrates the trisect system. It states that for a good action draw shot, the CB draws back at a
total angle that is 3-times the cut angle of the shot. In other words, the cut angle (A) trisects the total angle (3A).
This rule works well only for cut angles below about 40 degrees, corresponding to a 3/8-ball hit or fuller. For more
information and demonstrations pertaining to the how this system works, see “trisect system” on the draw shot
FAQ page at billiards.colostate.edu.

                                       Diagram 1 Draw shot trisect system

    Diagram 2 illustrates an example of how it is applied at the table in a game of 9-ball. The goal for this shot is
to draw the CB off the 1 to pocket the 9 in the corner for the win. The first step is to visualize the total angle
between the CB and desired carom direction. As demonstrated in online video NV E.4 you can do this by starting
with the tip of the cue in the anticipated ghost-ball position, with the cue over the CB … you don’t need to be
perfect here. Then pivot the cue to the desired carom direction, in this case toward the 9-ball. This defines the

Billiards Digest                                                                                     February, 2015
total carom angle for the shot. Then, also using your cue, visualize 1/3 of this angle. This defines the required
cut angle for the shot, assuming good-action draw. Now you just aim the shot as normal to send the 1 ball in the
necessary cut angle direction. It can sometimes help to pick a point on the rail to serve as the target direction for
the 1 ball. Using close to maximum backspin, with moderate speed, the carom should work as planned.

                                              Diagram 2 Carom shot example

     I hope you are enjoying my series of articles dealing with the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS)” DVD
collection. If you want to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV E.1 through
NV E.8. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV B.69 – Carom shots, from VEPS I
                    NV E.1 – Fractional-Ball Aiming, from HAPS I
                    NV E.2 – Back-Hand (BHE) and Front-Hand English (FHE), from HAPS I
                    NV E.3 – Using "Gearing" Outside English to Eliminate Throw, from HAPS I
                    NV E.4 – Carom-Shot Trisect-Draw System, from HAPS II
normal video        NV E.5 – Combination Shot Throw Adjustment, from HAPS II
                    NV E.6 – Rail Cut Shot Aiming, w/ and w/o Sidespin, from HAPS II
                    NV E.7 – Mirror Kick-Shot Aiming System, from HAPS III
                    NV E.8 – 1/3-More-Than-Twice Bank-Shot Aiming System, from HAPS III

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
               with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
               the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),”
“How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         February, 2015
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/haps_part_v_combination_shot_throw.pdf
title: HAPS Part V Combination Shot Throw
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“HAPS – Part V: Combination-Shot Throw”                                    ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at: dr-dave-
billiards.com.

    This is the fifth article in a series dealing with “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” a three-disc instructional-DVD
set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett. HAPS covers cut-shot aiming systems,
how to adjust for cut-induced throw, how to aim without guessing when using sidespin (english), and how to aim
specialty shots including caroms, kisses, combos, rail cut shots, and elevated-cue shots. Also included are
numerous simplified and effective systems for aiming kick and bank shots. An outline of the entire HAPS series
along with video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/aiming.

    This month, we will look at how to compensate for throw when aiming a combination shot, where the cue ball
                                                           nd
(CB) hits one object ball (OB) into another to pocket the 2 OB. First, it is important to realize that combination
                                                                                                                nd
shots can be a lot tougher than they look, because any error on the first hit grows into a larger error on the 2 hit,
so aiming must be precise. Generally, the easiest way to aim combos is to simply apply whatever aiming system
you use … twice. One technique is the ghost-ball cue-pivot method demonstrated in online videos NV D.9 and
                                                                                      nd
NV 7.1. You first place the cue tip at the necessary ghost-ball position for the 2 OB. Then pivot the cue to
                                             st
visualize the necessary line of aim for the 1 OB. Then place the tip at the required ghost-ball position to send
     st
the 1 OB along this line. Pivoting the cue to the CB then gives the necessary line of aim for the shot.
                                                                                 st
    With a combination shot, if the OBs are close or if fast speed is used, the 1 OB will be mostly sliding into the
 nd
2 OB because it doesn’t have enough time of distance to develop forward roll. As demonstrated on Disc I of
HAPS, cut-induced throw is largest for stun shots like this. If you don’t compensate your aim for throw, you will
miss small-gap combos. Maximum throw is about 1 inch per foot, and it occurs with slow-speed stun shots.
Diagram 1 shows an example where and understanding of these concepts is important. The 4 ball must be
aimed well left of the pocket, because the 1 ball will throw the 4 to the right. The ball-overlap centered-contact-
point aiming method covered on Disc I of HAPS is easy to use to help aim shots like this where the balls are close
together (to find the necessary line of aim for the 1 ball into the 4). For more information, see “double-the-
distance or double-the-overlap aiming method” under “aiming” in the FAQ page at billiards.colostate.edu.

                                    Diagram 1 Small-gap combo with throw

Billiards Digest                                                                                      March, 2015
                                                                                      nd
     When two OBs are frozen, throw can be used to change the direction of the 2 OB over quite a large range of
angles. Diagram 2 illustrates two examples where throw is necessary to pocket frozen combinations. Before we
                                                                                                 st
discuss the shots, let’s first cover some basics. First of all, when OBs are frozen, the 1 OB is guaranteed to
                                                                                 st
have stun into the 2nd, allowing for maximum throw. Also, cutting the 1 ball to the left of the “line of centers”
                                  nd                                     st                                nd
between the OB would throw 2 ball to the left, and cutting the 1 ball to the right would throw the 2 ball to the
right. A pure “line of centers” hit would result in no throw whatsoever. Up to about a ½-ball hit, the amount of
throw increases with the amount of cut. Throw is also generally larger with slower speeds, especially when close
to a ½-ball hit.       For more info on throw, see the throw resource page in the FAQ section at
billiards.colostate.edu. In Diagram 1a, the line-of-centers direction heads well right of the pocket, so we need to
throw the 3 quite a lot to the left, by cutting the 1 ball to the left. Here, we want to use slow-speed and a ½-ball-hit
between the 1 and 3 to create maximum throw. Remember, to get a ½-ball hit, aim the center of the 1 at the edge
of the 3. The 3 can be easily thrown to the pocket with this aim using slow speed. In Diagram 1b, the line-of-
centers direction heads well short of the pocket, so the 4 ball must be thrown to the left. Again, because we need
a large amount of throw here, it is best to use a ½-ball hit between the 2 and 4, and use slow speed.

                                          Diagram 2 Frozen-combo throw

     Diagram 3 shows an example where the line-of centers of the frozen balls heads straight to the pocket. With
a square hit on the 1-ball, which is close to a ½-ball hit on the 3, the 3 would get thrown way off line (to the right of
the pocket). This type of shot requires a line-of-centers hit on the 1-ball. Again, with a line of centers hit, the
frozen OB is not thrown at all. When this shot is hit properly, the 1-ball should not move very much (if at all). That
indicates that the line-of-centers hit was very accurate. With no sideways motion of the 1 ball, there is no throw of
the 3 ball and it heads straight to the pocket.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         March, 2015
                                          Diagram 3 Frozen combo with no throw

    Demonstrations of all of the shots in this article can be viewed in online video NV E.5. As always, you should
check out the video and try out the shots yourself the next time you are at a table. Reading is good, watching is
better, and trying is best.

     I hope you are enjoying my series of articles dealing with the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS)” DVD
collection. If you want to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV E.1 through
NV E.8. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV 7.1 – Aiming a combination shot
                    NV D.9 – How to Aim Pool Shots - from Vol-II of the Billiard University instructional DVD series
                    NV E.1 – Fractional-Ball Aiming, from HAPS I
                    NV E.2 – Back-Hand (BHE) and Front-Hand English (FHE), from HAPS I
                    NV E.3 – Using "Gearing" Outside English to Eliminate Throw, from HAPS I
normal video
                    NV E.4 – Carom-Shot Trisect-Draw System, from HAPS II
                    NV E.5 – Combination Shot Throw Adjustment, from HAPS II
                    NV E.6 – Rail Cut Shot Aiming, w/ and w/o Sidespin, from HAPS II
                    NV E.7 – Mirror Kick-Shot Aiming System, from HAPS III
                    NV E.8 – 1/3-More-Than-Twice Bank-Shot Aiming System, from HAPS III

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
               with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
               the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),”
“How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                           March, 2015
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/haps_part_vi_rail_cut_shots.pdf
title: HAPS Part Vi Rail Cut Shots
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“HAPS – Part VI: Rail Cut Shots”                                             ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at: dr-dave-
billiards.com.

     This is the sixth article in a series dealing with “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” a three-disc instructional-
DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett. HAPS covers cut-shot aiming
systems, how to adjust for cut-induced throw, how to aim without guessing when using sidespin (english), and
how to aim specialty shots including caroms, kisses, combos, rail cut shots, and elevated-cue shots. Also
included are numerous simplified and effective systems for aiming kick and bank shots. An outline of the entire
HAPS series along with video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/aiming.

     This month, we will look at the intricacies of how to aim rail cut shots, where the object ball (OB) is frozen to a
rail cushion. Diagram 1 shows a rail cut shot with three different cue ball (CB) positions. With a small-to-medium
cut angle like from CB position A, you should aim the shot as normal, as if the cushion were not there. If hitting a
stun shot with no sidespin (e.g., to have the CB head across table along the tangent line), to have the OB head
straight down the rail you would need to aim to overcut the ball slightly to compensate for throw, as presented in
detail on Disc I of HAPS. With a slight overcut, the CB hits the cushion slightly before the OB and hits the OB
while it is compressing the cushion. Even with steeper angles like from CB position B, you can still aim the shot
as normal, ignoring the cushion. For example, if using gearing outside english (described in my January ’15
article), there would be no throw so you would aim to hit the OB along the line of centers to the pocket. In that
case, the CB would ideally hit the OB and cushion at the same time. If using more sidespin than the gearing
amount, you would need to aim to hit the OB slightly before the cushion to send the OB straight down the rail as a
result of spin-induced throw (SIT).

     With steep-angle rail cut shots like from CB position C, the shot is much easier if you aim for a cushion-first hit
with running or inside english (in this case, right sidespin). With this approach, you don’t need to hit the shot as
hard as with a straight thin-cut hit. Also, the sidespin helps send the CB toward the OB as it rebounds off the
cushion, making the shot much easier. In online video NV E.6, we demonstrate how to use a combination of
backhand english (BHE) and front-hand english (FHE) to help aim the shot (described in my December ’14
article). Here, with the fairly short distance and medium speed, I use mostly BHE with a small amount of FHE, as
covered on Disc I of HAPS. I first aim center-ball to send the CB just in front of the OB on the cushion. Then I
pivot to apply nearly maximum right english. Then I stroke straight along the pivoted line. The CB heads off the
cushion and OB fairly close to the tangent line because the english “takes” on the cushion mostly before the CB
hits the OB. If the CB were to hit the OB first instead, before interacting with the cushion, the sidespin would sent
the CB much farther down table, possibly risking a scratch or even going long of the corner. With really steep
angles, it is possible to aim for the thin cut with no sidespin, but this approach is much more difficult. It requires
more speed, and the margin for error is much smaller than with the cushion-first running-english shot. Try out
both approaches and see which is more successful and consistent for you.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          April, 2015
                                          Diagram 1 Rail cut shot aiming

     Diagram 2 shows two options involving CB control with a rail cut shot from a game of 8 ball. Sometimes we
need sidespin to “take” on the cushion after the CB hits the OB. The two CB paths shown in the diagram are
examples. For the black path, you must hit the ball first just before hitting the cushion (or while the CB is just
beginning to contact and compress the cushion) with bottom-right (outside or reverse) english. The ball-first hit
allows the right sidespin to “take” off the cushion, causing the CB to rebound to the right to avoid the obstacle
balls and head up table for a shot at the 8. Depending on the amount of sidespin, this might drive the OB into the
cushion slightly, sending the OB off the cushion and to the outside of the pocket slightly, but if the OB is close
enough to the pocket, and/or if the pocket isn’t very “tight,” the ball will still be pocketed. Again, the ball-first hit
allows the sidespin to significantly change the rebound angle off the cushion. If the CB were to hit and interact
with the cushion before hitting the OB, the CB would head very close to the tangent-line direction instead and
collide with the obstacle balls (the 11 and 13).

     If the OB were farther from the pocket or if the pockets were really “tight,” it would be important to send the
OB straight down the rail. To accomplish this with a ball-first hit, more sidespin (more than the “gearing” amount)
would be needed to help throw the OB to the left some to counteract the undercut aim (although, the extra spin
would also change the CB direction). Alternatively, one could attempt to hit the ball and cushion at the same time
with “gearing” outside english (described in my January ’15 article and covered on Disc I of HAPS). This would
send the OB along the line of centers straight down the rail with no throw. The ball-to-ball contact would occur
before the CB interacts with the cushion, and the spin would still “take” as desired. The risk with this approach is
that if you hit the cushion in front of the ball, with the english taking before the CB hits the OB, the CB would come
off in the tangent-line direction instead, colliding with the obstacle balls.

     An alternative to using ball-first reverse english with the shot in Diagram 2 is to use running or inside english
instead, as shown with the blue path. As before, if the cushion were hit too early, all of the sidespin would “take”
before the CB hits the OB and the CB would come off close to the tangent line into the obstacle balls. To avoid
the obstacle balls and get up table for the 8, the CB must hit the OB before or during cushion compression. The
sidespin must interact with the cushion after the OB is gone for the rebound angle to lengthen past the tangent
line. The blue path in the diagram shows what happens with a ball-first hit with running english. Again, with the
ball-first hit, the OB gets thrown into the cushion slightly and rebounds off the rail a small amount, but it can still
be pocketed. To send the OB straight down the rail instead, you would need to hit the cushion a hair before the
OB. This would over cut the ball slightly away from the rail due to the compression of the cushion, but the left
spin would throw the ball back toward the rail, back on line. And again, as long as the OB is hit before the CB
interacts with the cushion too much, the english will still change the rebound angle off the rail.

Billiards Digest                                                                                           April, 2015
                                             Diagram 2 Rail cut shot CB control

     In summary, with rail cut shots, running english with a cushion-first hit can be used to help pocket the ball
when the angle is steep. And at all angles, reverse or running english can be used to move the CB off the
tangent line path only if the ball is hit before or during cushion compression. These two principles can make rail
cut shots easier and more effective. If you want more information or want to see super-slow-motion videos of a
range of different types of rail cut shots, see the “rail cut shots” resource page in the FAQ section at
billiards.colostate.edu.

    Demonstrations of all of the shots in this article can be viewed in online video NV E.6. As always, you should
check out the video and try the shots yourself the next time you are at a table. Reading is good, and watching is
better, but trying is best. Also, if you want to refer to any of my past articles mentioned above, they are all
available at billiards.colostate.edu.

     I hope you are enjoying my series of articles dealing with the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS)” DVD
collection. If you want to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV E.1 through
NV E.8. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV E.1 – Fractional-Ball Aiming, from HAPS I
                    NV E.2 – Back-Hand (BHE) and Front-Hand English (FHE), from HAPS I
                    NV E.3 – Using "Gearing" Outside English to Eliminate Throw, from HAPS I
                    NV E.4 – Carom-Shot Trisect-Draw System, from HAPS II
normal video
                    NV E.5 – Combination Shot Throw Adjustment, from HAPS II
                    NV E.6 – Rail Cut Shot Aiming, w/ and w/o Sidespin, from HAPS II
                    NV E.7 – Mirror Kick-Shot Aiming System, from HAPS III
                    NV E.8 – 1/3-More-Than-Twice Bank-Shot Aiming System, from HAPS III

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
               with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
               the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Billiards Digest                                                                                             April, 2015
Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),”
“How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                        April, 2015
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/haps_part_vii_kick_shots.pdf
title: HAPS Part Vii Kick Shots
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“HAPS – Part VII: Kick Shots”                                                    ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at: dr-dave-
billiards.com.

     This is the seventh article in a series dealing with “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” a three-disc instructional-
DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett. HAPS covers cut-shot aiming
systems, how to adjust for cut-induced throw, how to aim without guessing when using sidespin (english), and
how to aim specialty shots including caroms, kisses, combos, rail cut shots, and elevated-cue shots. Also
included are numerous simplified and effective systems for aiming kick and bank shots. An outline of the entire
HAPS series along with video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/aiming.

    This month, we will look at some simple but effective mirror-based systems for aiming kick shots, where the
cue ball (CB) is rebounded off a cushion before hitting an object ball (OB). These systems are completely visual
and do not require one to memorize a bunch of diamond numbering systems or formulas.

     Diagram 1 illustrates the visual equal-distance method. It works by placing the cue over the cue ball with the
tip in line with the rail diamonds. When the cue is along the correct line of aim, the tip will be in between the OB
target and the projected CB position along the cue. In other words, the distances on each side of the tip must be
equal. If the tip is too far to the shooter’s right, the distance on the OB side will be larger; and if the tip is too far to
the left, the distance on the CB side will be larger. In either case, you need to move the tip until the distances are
equal. At that point, you have the necessary line of aim for the shot. This method works only for slow-to-medium-
speed rolling-CB kicks where the target ball is a medium to far distance from the kicking rail. The CB must have
complete topspin roll when it reaches the cushion; otherwise, the CB will rebound short of the target. This
system, like many kicking systems, also requires that there be no sidespin on the CB. Even a small amount of
sidespin will change the rebound angle, so it is critical to get a vertical-centerline-hit when using the systems in
this article.

                          Diagram 1 Through-diamond equal-distance kicking system

Billiards Digest                                                                                               May, 2015
     An alternative to the equal-distance system is to mirror the CB or OB relative to the line of diamonds instead.
Diagram 2 illustrates how this works. We wish to kick at the 2-ball (for example, because there are obstacle balls
preventing a direct hit). To determine the required line of aim, just measure the distance from the center of the
OB to the line of diamonds. Then mirror this distance to the other side. As demonstrated in online video NV E.7,
you can use your cue to easily measure off and mirror the distance. The required line of aim is from the CB to
this mirrored point. As with the equal distance method, you can project or mirror either ball. In this case, where
the OB is closer to the rail, it can be easier to mirror the smaller OB distance instead of the larger CB distance.
This mirror system actually results in the same line of aim as the equal-distance system, but the technique is quite
different.

                              Diagram 2 Through-diamond mirror kicking system

      When fast speed is used or when the OB is close to the kicking rail, the same methods we just covered can
still be applied; but as shown in Diagram 3, the measuring and mirroring must take place relative to the rail
groove instead of the line of diamonds. The rail groove is the imaginary line where balls sit when they are in
contact with the cushion. On an old and worn cloth, the rail groove is actually visible from wear and dirt.
Measuring relative to the rail groove creates a true mirror aim, which again applies only at fast speed or when the
OB is close to the rail. If you were to measure relative to the line of diamonds instead, the CB would come up
short of the target because the fast speed or short distance does not give the CB enough time to bend forward
after rebound, as is the case with a slow-rolling kick. In this example, we want to attempt to pocket the 2 in the
opposite side pocket. Therefore, instead of mirroring the OB for a square hit, we should mirror the desired ghost-
ball target instead to attempt to pocket the ball. First measure the distance from the center of the ghost-ball
position to the rail groove. Then mirror this distance to the other side. The necessary aim point in the rail groove
will be along a line from the CB to the mirrored point. As demonstrated in online video NV E.7, it is usually easier
to target points on the rail along the line of diamonds, so it can be helpful to project the aiming line to the rail and
find a feature on the wood or visualize the distance from the nearest diamond. This provides a very clear aim
point for the shot.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          May, 2015
                                 Diagram 3 Rail groove mirror kicking system

     For slow kicks with the target far from the cushion, we measure or mirror relative to the line of diamonds. For
fast-speed or short-distance kicks, we use the rail groove. For shots in between, still with a rolling CB, where the
speed and distance are medium, measuring or mirroring relative to the cushion nose is a good alternative, as
shown in Diagram 4. This provides a good average reference for a wide range of kicks. That’s why some people
prefer to measure all kicks relative to the cushion nose, or relative to the base of the cushion just inside of the
nose, and just make adjustments for speed and distance as necessary. On HAPS-I, we recommend instead to
use whichever reference is most appropriate for the specific shot you are shooting. Then little or no adjustment is
required. The equal-distance and mirror methods work the same way regardless of the reference … you just use
a different line depending on speed and distance.

                           Diagram 4 Cushion-nose equal-distance kicking system

Billiards Digest                                                                                       May, 2015
     One caution concerning mirroring deals with accuracy. When mirroring a ball or target close to the rail, a
small error in the small distance measurement can have a big effect on the resulting aim. However, when
mirroring a target far from the rail, it can be difficult to keep the mirroring line perpendicular to the rail, especially
when visualizing the line from the mirror point to the CB to find the aim point on the rail. Try out both approaches
when you practice to see which works better for you. Concerning whether you choose the equal-distance
approach or the mirror approach, the equal-distance approach is more visual and can be faster; although it can be
difficult to visualize at larger angles and distances. The mirror approach can be more accurate if done carefully,
but it is more cumbersome, requires more room, and it takes longer. Again, try both approaches to see which you
prefer in different situations.

    Demonstrations of all of the shots in this article can be viewed in online video NV E.7. The HAPS-III DVD
also includes numerous game-situation examples showing how the systems are applied effectively at the table.
As always, you should check out the videos and try the shots yourself the next time you are at a table. Reading is
good, and watching is better, but trying is best. If you want more information or want to learn about other kick
shot aiming systems, see the “bank and kick shots” resource page in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.

     I hope you are enjoying my series of articles dealing with the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS)” DVD
collection. If you want to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV E.1 through
NV E.8. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV E.1 – Fractional-Ball Aiming, from HAPS I
                    NV E.2 – Back-Hand (BHE) and Front-Hand English (FHE), from HAPS I
                    NV E.3 – Using "Gearing" Outside English to Eliminate Throw, from HAPS I
                    NV E.4 – Carom-Shot Trisect-Draw System, from HAPS II
normal video
                    NV E.5 – Combination Shot Throw Adjustment, from HAPS II
                    NV E.6 – Rail Cut Shot Aiming, w/ and w/o Sidespin, from HAPS II
                    NV E.7 – Mirror Kick-Shot Aiming System, from HAPS III
                    NV E.8 – 1/3-More-Than-Twice Bank-Shot Aiming System, from HAPS III

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
               with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
               the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),”
“How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                             May, 2015
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/haps_part_viii_bank_shots.pdf
title: HAPS Part Viii Bank Shots
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“HAPS – Part VIII: Bank Shots”                                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at: dr-dave-
billiards.com.

     This is the eighth and final article in a series dealing with “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” a three-disc
instructional-DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett. HAPS covers cut-shot
aiming systems, how to adjust for cut-induced throw, how to aim without guessing when using sidespin (english),
and how to aim specialty shots including caroms, kisses, combos, rail cut shots, and elevated-cue shots. Also
included are numerous simplified and effective systems for aiming kick and bank shots. An outline of the entire
HAPS series along with video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/aiming.

     This month, we will look at a simple but effective system for aiming bank shots, where the cue ball (CB) hits
an object ball (OB) off a cushion into a pocket. In my July ’13 article (available at billiards.colostate.edu) I
covered various fast-speed bank-shot aiming systems. Diagram 1 illustrates a good general-purpose system that
works over a wide range of angles. I call it the 1/3-more-than-twice system. The diagram shows several
reference tracks that illustrates how the system works. The aim points for the reference lines are measured in the
rail grooves across from diamond locations. Remember, the “rail groove” is where the base of a ball sits when it
is frozen to the cushion. With each reference line, the point at which the line of aim crosses the near-rail groove
is 1/3 of a diamond above the 2-times distance point predicted by a true mirror aim. The reference tracks are 1/3
more than 1 to ½, 1/3 more than 2 to 1, 1/3 more than 3 to 1 ½, 1/3 more than 4 to 2, and so on. I know this
might sound and look a little complicated at first; but once you get the hang of it, it is fairly easy to remember and
visualize. The only thing you really need to remember is “1/3 more than twice.”

                            Diagram 1 1/3-more-than-twice system reference lines

    The 1/3-more-than-twice system requires that the OB be sliding into the cushion with close to stun. When the
OB is far from the rail, fast speed is required to have this occur. When the OB is close to the rail, fast speed is not
required since the OB doesn’t have time or distance to develop roll, and it will automatically be sliding into the

Billiards Digest                                                                                         June, 2015
cushion regardless of the shot speed. It can be useful to practice banks on the reference tracks to get a feel for
the speed required, and to practice visualizing the tracks. To do this, first place a ball on the cushion at the 1st
diamond. Then place a ball on the opposite cushion a 1/3 of a diamond above the 2nd diamond. Then place the
CB and OB along this line. Then remove the ball on the banking cushion and set up for the shot with the cue
directly over the ball on the near cushion aimed squarely at the OB. NV E.8 demonstrates how this can be done
for all of the reference tracks. First try out all of these tracks before attempting to use the system on actual shots.
Remember, for each track, the crossing point in the groove of the near rail is at 1/3 more than twice the distance
in the banking-rail groove.

     For an arbitrary bank shot, one way to apply the system is to see which track the OB is closest to and adjust
between the tracks as necessary. Diagram 2 illustrates an example. Here, the OB is fairly close to the 1/3-more-
than-2-to-1 track, so we just need to make a small adjustment relative to the reference track. When adjusting, the
line of aim should be shifted twice as much in the near-rail groove as in the far-rail groove, per the blue “2x” and
“x” in the diagram. You can easily judge this with your cue, as demonstrated in NV E.8. Since the 3 ball is not
very close to the rail, fast speed must be used on this shot to ensure the 3 ball slides into the cushion.

                                               Diagram 2 Example 1

      Diagram 3 illustrates another example. As demonstrated in NV E.8, when visualizing a track, it can help to
first put the cue tip in the rail groove across from a diamond, and then pivot to the 1/3 more than twice point in the
opposite rail groove. In this example, the OB is in between the 1/3-more-than-4-to-2 and 1/3-more-than-5-to-2.5
tracks. So in this case, you can just use the rail groove point in between the two track crossings to find the
necessary line of aim for the OB (see the blue dashed circle and line in the diagram). Since the 3 ball is very
close to the cushion, almost any speed will work since the 3 ball doesn’t have time or distance to develop forward
roll before hitting the cushion.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         June, 2015
                                              Diagram 3 Example 2

      An alternative to the rail-groove 1/3-more-than-twice system is a through-diamond system presented in my
July ’13 article. It can be described concisely as the "x to 3/8x" through-diamond system, as opposed to the
"(2x+1/3)-to-x” rail-groove system described above. With this alternative system, the aim point on the banking rail
(3/8x) is between 25% (1/4) and 50% (1/2) of the distance from the target pocket as the distance on the adjacent
rail (x). Diagram 4 compares the two systems, showing the reference tracks for both. As an example of an "x to
3/8x" reference track, look at the gray line through diamond 4 on the bottom rail. The corresponding required line
of aim heads through the 1.5 (3/8 * 4 = 3/2) diamond point on the top rail. As is clear in the diagram, the two
systems provide very close to the same lines of aim for small-to-medium-angle banks. At larger bank angles,
above the (5+1/3)-to-2.5 line, the "1/3-more than twice" system aim will tend to make the ball bank a little short of
target (in which case you can make a small adjustment, based on practice with the system).

                   Diagram 4 Comparison of “1/3-more-than-twice” and the "x to 3/8x" systems

Billiards Digest                                                                                       June, 2015
   In addition to being able to use the aiming systems described above, there are advantages to using fast
speed with bank shots. For more info, see: “advantages of fast speed” on the “bank and kick shots” resource
page in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.

    Demonstrations of all of the shots in this article can be viewed in online video NV E.8. The HAPS-III DVD
also includes numerous game-situation examples showing how the system is applied effectively at the table. As
always, you should check out the videos and try the shots yourself the next time you are at a table. Reading is
good, and watching is better, but trying is best. If you want more information or want to learn about other bank
shot aiming systems, see the “bank and kick shots” resource page in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.

     I hope you have enjoyed my series of articles dealing with the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS)” DVD
collection. If you want to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV E.1 through
NV E.8 online. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV E.1 – Fractional-Ball Aiming, from HAPS I
                    NV E.2 – Back-Hand (BHE) and Front-Hand English (FHE), from HAPS I
                    NV E.3 – Using "Gearing" Outside English to Eliminate Throw, from HAPS I
                    NV E.4 – Carom-Shot Trisect-Draw System, from HAPS II
normal video
                    NV E.5 – Combination Shot Throw Adjustment, from HAPS II
                    NV E.6 – Rail Cut Shot Aiming, w/ and w/o Sidespin, from HAPS II
                    NV E.7 – Mirror Kick-Shot Aiming System, from HAPS III
                    NV E.8 – 1/3-More-Than-Twice Bank-Shot Aiming System, from HAPS III

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
               with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
               the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),”
“How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                            June, 2015
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/hold_the_line.pdf
title: Hold The Line
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Hold the Line”                                                            ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at drdavepoolinfo.com. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    In recent online video NV L.107, I demonstrated a very useful cue ball (CB) control principle involving rail
cut shots, where the cue ball is brought straight back along the shooting line with the right amount of outside
draw. An example shot is shown in Image 1, where I am trying to get shape on the 8 up-table. I’ll summarize
the main points of the video along with a useful drill to practice the skill.

                               Image 1 Bringing the CB back along the line

    As shown in Image 2, when the object ball (OB) is close to about a ball off the rail, the CB can be brought
back along the shooting line at any angle into the rail. At steep angles, mostly sidespin can get the job done
(see the white and red paths). And at shallow angles, mostly backspin is required (see the green and yellow
paths). In the middle of the range, maximum outside-draw is required (see the blue path). The best thing about
the principle is it lets you know what is possible from any direction. Knowing you can “hold the line” along the
shot direction can help you plan position accordingly.

                                Image 2 “Hold the Line” principle and drill
Billiards Digest                                     1                                                 April 2026
    Let’s look at two game-situation 8-ball examples that are demonstrated in the video. In Image 3, I need to
get shape on the 8 up-table. Because I know I can bring the CB back along the shooting line, I am confident to
get the CB above the opposite side pocket for Z-path shape on the 8.

                                     Image 3 Game situation example #1

     In Image 4, because I can hold the line, I know I can easily break out the 10-13 cluster to enable the runout.
Knowing and practicing with the principle can help you execute these types of shots with confidence. And it
will help you win more games.

                                     Image 4 Game situation example #2

Billiards Digest                                      2                                                   April 2026
     To develop and improve the skill and feel necessary to best take advantage of the “hold the line” principle,
it can be very helpful to practice he drill shown in Image 5. The 11 is a ball off the rail at the 2nd diamond. The
goal is to pocket the 11 and hit each of the 9 balls along the rails by shooting along the line from each ball. The
CB position shown is along the shot line from the 1. As demonstrated in the video, the 7-ball is the toughest
target in the drill, requiring maximum outside draw. At that CB position, it helps to hit the 11 as full as possible
with just the right speed.

                                           Image 5 “Hold the Line” drill

    It is also helpful to practice cut-shot CB control with the OB farther from the rail, where you have much more
control. Another video (NV J.102) demonstrates a good drill for this, where combinations of stun, follow, draw,
and sidespin are used to control the CB over a very wide range.

    Be sure to check out the videos, especially NV L.107. It demonstrates everything above and a lot more. It
covers how to judge the effects of sidespin, speed, and fullness of hit with these types of shots. It also covers
the effects of OB distance from the rail. The video also covers a useful twice-the-angle system for judging CB
direction for rail cut shots with “good action” draw. Be sure to try everything at the table so you can get the
most benefit from the video.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV J.102 – Using The Rail For More Position Options
                   NV L.107 – Useful CB Control Principle for RAIL CUT SHOTS … Bringing the CB Back
   normal video        ALONG THE LINE

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at drdavepoolinfo.com.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.
Billiards Digest                                         3                                                   April 2026
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/how_high_or_low_should_you_hit_the_cue_ball.pdf
title: How High Or Low Should You Hit The Cue Ball
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“How High or Low Should You Hit the Cue Ball?”                                ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and technical proofs (TP),
and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference
numbers used in my articles will help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or
inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details
can be found online at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     In this article, we look at how high or low you should hit the cue ball (CB) for different types of shots.
Let’s start with some basics. Whenever you need to hit the CB off center to impart spin, it is very important to
know how far off center you can hit without risking a miscue. If you hit farther from center than the miscue
limit, the tip will slip off the ball, resulting in a poor hit. As illustrated in Diagram 1a, the miscue limit is
generally accepted to be half the ball’s radius (0.5R) from center. It just so happens that many pool balls
have a stripe width that is very close to half the ball’s diameter. Therefore, the edges of the stripe can help
you visualize how high or low you can safely hit the CB, assuming, of course, your tip is well chalked. But,
not all balls have the same stripe width. As shown in Diagram 1b, you can check a given set of balls by
placing three striped balls together in a triangle with the three stripes oriented in the same direction. If the
edges of the stripes align, then the stripe widths are in fact half the ball diameters and the correct size for
demarcating the miscue limit.

                                        R                                        11         0.5D = R
                                            0.5R      9           D       9
                                            0.5R
                                                                                 10
                               a.) miscue limits                      b.) checking stripe width

                                              Diagram 1 Miscue limit

     Diagram 2 shows several important tip height references. Diagram 2a shows the tip height that causes
the CB to roll immediately on the table surface as it leaves the tip. This immediate-roll height is just below the
miscue limit at 40% of the ball’s radius (0.4R). Hitting below this causes the CB to first slide across the cloth
with less topspin than is necessary for the CB to roll naturally. While sliding, drag action between the CB and
cloth gradually slows the ball down while simultaneously increasing the amount of topspin. The sliding
continues until the ball begins to roll forward naturally. An example of where you would want to hit the CB at
the immediate roll height is a fast-speed follow shot (AKA a “force follow” shot). You want the CB to have full
roll when it arrives at the object ball (OB) to generate good follow action. If you were to hit lower than the
0.4R height, the CB probably wouldn’t have full roll when it reaches the OB.

     Diagram 3 shows another example where an immediate-roll shot is necessary. The CB is very close to
the 6-ball and our options are limited. However, the carom shot (the billiard off the 6 into the 9) is a natural,
provided the CB is rolling into the 6-ball. Remember the 30 degree rule? (If not, see the 30˚ rule FAQ page
on my website). With many shots, because of the distance separating the CB and OB, the CB develops roll
on its own even if you hit at or below center. Here, however, there isn’t enough distance for that to occur. So
you must hit the CB close to the 0.4R height to ensure rolling. Because the 9-ball is in the natural-angle
direction, this shot is really tough to miss, provided the CB hits the 6-ball with roll. Just be careful to not use
too much speed, which can cause the CB to swing out too much before curving and go wide of the 9-ball.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       September, 2011
                                                   0.4R                              0.4R-0.5R

                              a.) immediate roll                     b.) overspin

                                                                                     0.2R
                                                   0.4R

                             c.) long power draw          d.) optimal speed/distance control

                                    Diagram 2 Reference cue tip heights

                                                                   fast
                                                                   medium
                                                                   slow

                                                                            7
                                       30º
                                      natural                6
                                      angle
                                                     8

                                                                                9

                                    Diagram 3 Immediate roll carom shot

    As illustrated in Diagram 2b, there is a small range of tip heights between the immediate roll height
(0.4R) and the miscue limit (0.5R) where the CB can be given overspin, which is more topspin than the
natural roll amount. However, as demonstrated in NV B.36 and HSV B.26, it is very difficult to create
significant overspin, and the potential benefit of such a small amount of additional topspin is very limited.
Bottom line: it's really unwise and unnecessary to flirt with the miscue limit on follow shots. Immediate roll is
more than adequate for even the most dramatic follow action.

    When there’s a large distance between the CB and OB and you want to draw the CB back a large
distance, a “power draw” shot is required. Diagram 2c shows the optimal cue tip height for such a shot. It
seems reasonable that to get the best draw with a shot like this, you would want to hit the CB as low as
possible (i.e., as close to the miscue limit as possible). However, physics shows that the best draw action on
shots like this results from hitting slightly above the miscue limit at about 0.4R (see my April ’09 article for an
explanation). You also need adequate cue speed to get good draw action. For more information and
technique advice, see NV B.65 and the power draw FAQ page on my website. Did you notice that the long-

Billiards Digest                                                                                    September, 2011
power-draw tip height below center (0.4R) is the same as the immediate-roll height above center? This is just
a coincidence, but it makes it easier to remember how high or low to hit the ball with these types of shots.

    Diagram 2d shows another cue tip height reference at 0.2R. It turns out that this height results in the
best (most consistent) speed and distance control. If you are interested in the physics behind this and don’t
mind a little math, see TP B.12. When you hit the CB in the center, it leaves the tip with maximum speed for
a given cue speed, and it starts out with no spin. As the ball slides (drags) on the cloth, it slows down as it
develops topspin and, eventually, natural roll. When you hit the CB at the immediate roll height, the ball
doesn’t slow from drag, but it has less forward speed initially than if hit at center ball. The 0.2R height
provides a “happy medium” that creates the most consistent final rolling speed and eventual travel distance.
Ball speed and distance will be least sensitive to slight changes in tip position at this height (see TP B.12 for
more info). Therefore, when executing a lag shot, or any shot where you want the CB to travel a precise
distance, improve your consistency by hitting a little above center at 0.2R.
                      NV B.65 – Power draw technique advice from VEPS I
                      NV B.36 – Mike Page's overspin demonstration
normal video          NV B.65 – Power draw technique advice from VEPS I

                      HSV B.26 – Overspin with a follow shot
high-speed video

                      TP B.12 - Optimal tip height for speed/distance control
technical proof

    I hope this article will help you be more aware of how high or low to hit the CB for different types of shots.
And I hope you might have better success with these shots. Next month, we’ll look at the lag shot in more
detail, providing additional advice on how to be more effective and consistent with winning the break.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary on my website.
      •        I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help find errors
               and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts. Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD: “High-speed
Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                    September, 2011
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/how_pros_aim.pdf
title: How Pros Aim
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“How Pros Aim”                                                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Are you tired of missing shots you shouldn’t miss? If so, then you are in the right place. In this column, I
announce a new aiming system called Dave’s Aiming Method or DAM! DAM is the greatest thing since sliced
bread! And it is guaranteed to bring your game to the next level!

    I am being a little silly about DAM to make fun of some of the outrageous “marketing claims” we have heard
about many “aiming systems” proposed over the years. But DAM is a real thing. Although, it isn’t really a
system. It is just an explanation and detailed summary of how pros and top players aim. This column covers
every important element of DAM, each of which is demonstrated and discussed in detail in online video NV
L.38.

Aim While Standing

    The most important thing pros do when they aim is visualize the shot and aim while standing, before getting
down into their stance. Pros do not use any procedural aiming “systems” for cut shots. They aim intuitively
using all the visualization capabilities of their brain trained by countless hours of smart practice and successful
experience. They just “see” the shot angle and required line of aim.

    Aiming while standing is important because, as shown in Image 1, from a higher perspective it is much
easier to see the angle and aim of a shot. It is much more difficult to see the required line of aim when down
on the shot. Therefore, you should trust the aim you see while standing and not change your aim when in a
low stance.

                              Image 1 View of a shot from a high perspective

Billiards Digest                                      1                                               February, 2024
    If you have difficulty aiming, it can help to practice visualizing the imaginary ghost ball, where the cue ball
(CB) needs to be at object ball (OB) impact. It can also help some people to visualize the required contact point
between the balls. And it can also help some people to just visualize the amount of CB-OB overlap (or “shot
picture”) required to create the cut angle necessary. The aiming template in Image 2, which can be printed to
scale from the link in the YouTube video description, can be cut out and used at the table to practice visualizing
the cut angle, ghost-ball position, contact point, and amount of ball overlap for any shot.

                                      Image 2 Cut shot aiming template

     To practice ghost-ball and contact point visualization, it can help to set up a shot with the ball number at
the required contact point. As shown in Image 3, you can also place an extra CB at the required ghost-ball
position. And, if using Red Measle CBs or any marked or striped balls, you can line up the dots, marks, or
stripes with the line of the shot at both the ghost ball and CB. All these things can help you train yourself during
practice to visualize the angle and aiming line required for the shot.

                              Image 3 Using red-measles balls to visualize aim

Billiards Digest                                       2                                               February, 2024
     Regardless of what you focus on when you aim, it can help to visualize the line to the pocket by standing
behind the OB-to-pocket line. This also helps you clearly see the angle of the shot. Then return to the CB to
do the most important part of “aiming while standing,” where you visualize and align to the required line of aim.
This position is where pros do most of their actual aiming, visualizing the line to the pocket, cut angle, ghost
ball, and required line of aim. When moving from the pocket line view to the CB view, it can help some people
to focus on the required ghost ball position or contact point during the move.

Vision Center Alignment

     An important part of “aiming while standing” is carefully aligning your personal vision center with the line of
the shot. If you want to find and test your vision center position, see the videos and info on the resource page
linked in the video description. Even though I am right-eye dominant, my personal vision center is right between
my eyes, so I have my nose lined up with the line of the shot while standing and when down on the shot (see
Image 4). If I did not, I would see the shot wrong.

Focused and Straight Drop

     When most top players get down into their stance, their eyes are focused along the aiming line at the OB
target. This helps them drop straight down, keeping their vision center aligned with the line of the shot the
entire time (see Image 4). This should be the case regardless of how you get down into your stance. In the
video, I demonstrate both walking into the stance, and starting with my back foot in place and stepping out into
the stance. Regardless, when you get down into your stance with focus on the OB, you are rotating the
visualized “shot picture” straight down into the stance. This helps you maintain the “aiming while standing”
alignment the whole way down, so you don’t need to aim when you are down on the shot, which can be
problematic.

                       Image 4 Dropping vision center straight down into the stance

Tip and Cue Alignment Check

    When a pro is down on the shot, they move their eyes back and forth between the CB and OB to make
sure the cue is aligned with the “aim while standing” shot picture. It is best to hold the cue still while doing this
so you can better focus on tip and cue alignment. You need to verify that the tip is exactly where you want on
the CB and the cue is aligned perfectly with the line of aim. If things are off a little, you need to rotate the cue
and shift the bridge hand together small amounts to bring the tip and cue into alignment. As demonstrated in

Billiards Digest                                       3                                               February, 2024
the video, you cannot just pivot the cue or just shift the bridge hand. Both must be done together to arrive at
the correct line of aim with the desired tip contact position.

Focus Lock and Execution

    “Focus” is a key word in several DAM elements. Consistent and intense focus is one thing that separates
the great players from everybody else. An important step after warm-up strokes and before the final stroke is
a pause at the CB. At this point, great players do a final check and then lock their eyes on the OB target before
the final stroke. And they execute the stroke with still “laser focus” eyes, still head and body, and good
fundamentals, creating a straight stroke with smooth acceleration into the CB for accurate and consistent speed
control. If you need help with your stroke fundamentals, see the “best practices” link in the video description.

HAMB

    The main reason why pros aim so well is they have put in the practice. There is no shortcut to aiming
excellence. You literally need to Hit A Million Balls (HAMB) to reach pro level. The keys are practicing a lot,
diagnosing your misses, and learning from your mistakes. Only smart practice makes perfect. If you want
some advice on how to practice the most effectively, see the link in the video description.

     If you ask pros how they aim, most are not able to express a clear, accurate, and satisfying answer. The
main reason for this is they aim intuitively without thinking. They are certainly not using any sort of procedural
“aiming system.” What makes them so effective is lots of smart practice and using a consistent and purposeful
pre-shot routine. It is important to learn how to aim intuitively without cluttering your brain with “aiming system”
mumbo jumbo or any thoughts, or by trying to focus on a single thing like a contact point or an imaginary ghost
ball. Aiming is a very visual thing that requires the full power of the brain to execute. If you train your brain to
aim naturally through smart practice and a consistent and purposeful pre-shot routine, you will develop and
improve faster.

     Again, everything in this column is discussed and demonstrated in detail in online video NV L.38. For more
information and help, see the DAM resource page link int eh video description!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV L.38 – HOW TO AIM in Pool and Billiards … The AIMING SYSTEM of the PROS
   normal video

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                         4                                               February, 2024
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/how_to_break_in_3_ball.pdf
title: How To Break In 3 Ball
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“How to Break in 3-Ball”                                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference
numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Have you ever played 3-ball? If you have been around pool awhile, I am sure you have. And you have
probably won or lost lots of $1 bills in the process. The goal of 3-ball is to pocket three balls with as few shots
as possible, including the break. Let’s look at different strategies for the all-important break shot, all of which
are demonstrated in online video NV J.4.

     One approach is to just hit the break hard from the side or center and hope something goes. Obviously,
this is not a very good approach. The probability to make a ball is low, and you don’t always get an easy shot
after the break. Sometimes you will make a ball and get good shape for an easy run; but more often than not,
no balls will go and you won’t know where things will end up. If you don’t make a ball on the break, the best
score you can get is a 4, assuming you don’t scratch on the break, have a shot after the break, and don’t miss
any shots. Another option, shown in Diagram 1, is to use a soft break and play for a post-break shot at the 1.
You’re unlikely to make a ball this way, but you give yourself a good chance to a run out for a score of 4.

                                             Diagram 1 Soft break

    Another approach, as shown by the solid ball paths in Diagram 2, is to use power, breaking from the
side, focusing on pocketing the 3 off 4 rails. If you back-cut the 1, the 3 usually goes long; and if you hit the 1
squarely, the 3 usually goes short. If you use just the right amount of slight back cut, you can make the 3.
However, as shown in online video NV J.4, the 2 can sometimes get in the way. Sometimes you can get
better results breaking from the other side of the table, which is always a good thing to check with all of the
approaches. Regardless, the 3-ball direction is very sensitive to the angle of the hit, so this approach is also
nonideal.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       October, 2018
                                               Diagram 2 Banks

    Another approach, shown with the dotted ball paths in Diagram 2, is to hit the 2 first, attempting to bank
the 3 cross corner. It doesn’t go on my table because I can’t get quite enough throw and spin-transfer from
the 2 to the 3 to get enough angle. However, on a table with old and dirty balls, or with cushions that bank
long, this might be a very easy and reliable approach. I can make it work on my table by adding chalk to the
contact point between the 2 and 3, creating more friction to increase the amount of throw and spin transfer,
but that’s cheating. An advantage of the soft-bank approach, if it works on your table, is the balls stay close,
usually resulting in a fairly easy run out for a score of 3. As demonstrated in online video NV J.4, an option
on my table is to use more speed, attempting to bank the 3 twice across. A benefit of the extra speed is the 2
also has a chance to bank to the upper-left corner. However, this approach is low percentage since the twice-
across bank requires a near-perfect hit.

     Another option, shown with the dashed ball paths in Diagram 2, is to hit the 1 at a slight angle to send the
3 off two rails to the opposite corner. And with the right speed, you can also leave an easy shot at the 1 or 2
for an easy score of 3. This approach might seem good, but it is tough to get the hit just right to pocket the 3.

     Diagram 3 shows my favorite 3-ball break strategy, using soft speed with inside english, just barely
clipping the 1 ball. With a good hit, the 3 goes into the corner and the 1 and 2 come to rest in the middle of
the table, usually for an easy runout. Also, the inside english kills and straightens the cue ball’s motion to get
a good shot after the break. With the leave in the diagram, you can use a combination to both pocket the 2
and follow the 1 into the side for a score of 2, which is awesome. Sometimes, you can pocket both the 2 and
3 on the break for an easy score of 2, but this is difficult to do consistently. Online video NV J.4 demonstrates
several ways to get a score of 2 using these approaches. And even if you don’t pocket the 3 or the 2, you
usually still get a very good chance for an easy score of 4. And even if you entirely miss the 1, you still
usually get a decent chance for a score of 4. So this break approach has very little down-side risk. You
almost always have a good shot at a score of 4; and with a good hit, a 3 is very easy, and even a 2 is
possible. You can’t ask for much better than this.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      October, 2018
                                         Diagram 3 Thin with inside

     Actually, you can ask for better than a 4, 3, or 2. You can ask to pocket all three balls on the break for a
score of 1! There is an approach to do this, but it is very aggressive with down-side risks, and it is low-
percentage. As shown in Diagram 4, you need to break from the side and thin the 1 with fast speed and a
center ball hit. With just the right hit and conditions, you can make the 3 in the corner, the 1 in the side, and
the 2 in the upper corner. Online video NV J.4 demonstrates several good attempts on my table. As with the
earlier soft-speed approach, the key is thinning the 1 the exact amount necessary to send the 3 to the corner.
I wasn’t able to pocket all three balls on my 9’ Olhaussen; but on a table that banks short, like most Diamond
tables, you have a better chance of succeeding for a score of 1!

Billiards Digest                                                                                     October, 2018
                                                Diagram 4 Fast thin hit

    I hope you enjoyed learning about all of the different 3-ball break strategy options. The next time
somebody challenges you to a friendly 3-ball gambling match or proposition, you should now be better
prepared to teach them a lesson with some low scores.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.4 – 3-Ball Pool Break Strategy and Tips - How to Make a Ball and Score Low
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      October, 2018
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/how_to_break_like_a_pro.pdf
title: How to Break Like a Pro FEATURE ARTICLE
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
How to Break Like a Pro                                                                   FEATURE ARTICLE
by David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     The break shot is arguably the most important shot in pool. Whether you are playing 8-ball, 9-ball or 10-ball,
if you can consistently pocket a ball, and control the cue ball (CB) after the break, you will be a heavy favorite to
win the game, especially if you are a good player. In this article, I will break down and summarize important
elements of technique necessary to break like a pro.

    Recently, I filmed Shane Van Boening taking the Billiard University (BU) Playing-Ability Exams so he could
enter the $2500 BU Exam Challenge (for more info, see: billiards.colostate.edu/BU_challenge.html), and when
he did the break-shot portion of Exam II, I filmed him both with a regular video camera and from the side with a
slow-motion video camera. Shane is considered one of the best breakers in the world, so I decided to break
down and analyze what technique elements allow him to be so successful. Online video NH H.5 shows Shane’s
breaks and discusses some of the distinctive and important elements of his technique, and Diagram 1 shows
video stills at key points.

     There are several things Shane does to help create controlled power. First of all, he aims the break shot as
carefully as any other really important pool shot. The most important attribute of a good break is getting a square
hit on the lead ball. As shown in Diagram 1a, another thing Shane does is “choke up” on the grip. Generally,
during regular play, the forearm should be perpendicular to the cue at tip contact, but moving the grip forward
some can help put the shoulder and elbow into stronger positions during the stroke into the ball. Notice Shane’s
tip position at CB address. The tip is well below center, which might make you think he will impart bottom spin or
draw to the CB. However, during his stroke he drops his elbow to add power, and this results in a hit slightly
above center (see Diagram 1d). The hit above center creates slight topspin that helps the CB slow after
bouncing back from collective weight of the racked balls.

    As shown in Diagrams 1b and 1c, Shane lifts his body before the final forward stroke. The higher body
position, in combination with the choked up grip, allows him to create more leverage with more distance from the
shoulder to the grip (see the long lever arm represented by the yellow line in Diagram 1c). This allows him to
generate more power with less effort. And with less effort, he is able to better control accuracy and consistency.
Shane actually lifts his body and drops his cue during the backstroke and during the initial part of the forward
stroke into the CB, but this can also be done before the stroke, with the cue already in a near-level position, as
demonstrated in online video NV D.14. Many people will probably have better accuracy and consistency if they
raise the body and lower the cue before the final stroke.

     In Diagram 1c, notice how relaxed Shane’s grip and wrist are as he begins to accelerate forward. It is as if
his arm is doing all of the work, and the grip and wrist are just “along for the ride.” Also notice in Diagrams 1c,
1d, and 1e how he has the cue as level as possible during the forward stroke into and through the ball. This limits
how much the CB hops on the way to the rack. Also notice how he moves his entire arm, flexing and dropping
the elbow together to generate more power while keeping the cue moving as straight as possible (see the yellow
lines in Diagrams 1b and 1e). Generally, with normal shots, it is best to keep the elbow relatively still during the
stroke into the CB, but with the break, the elbow drop can be very helpful. For more info, see the “elbow drop”
resource page in the “stroke” section of the FAQ page at billiards.colostate.edu.

   Shane also has good acceleration into the CB with a complete and straight follow through. He also keeps his
head and body very still during the final stroke into the CB. You can see this in Diagram 1d where his head and
upper body are in perfect focus while the moving arm is not. To see all of Shane’s brilliance in super slow motion,
check out online video NH H.5.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      September, 2016
                   a.) choked-up grip position at ball address

                   b.) end of backswing with body lift started

Billiards Digest                                                 September, 2016
                   c.) beginning of forward swing

                   d.) power position at CB contact

Billiards Digest                                      September, 2016
                   e.) follow-through position with significant elbow drop and shoulder motion

                                 Diagram 1 Video frames from Shane’s 9-ball break

     Depending on which game you play, strategy varies for where to place the CB and how you hit the break to
get the best chance of pocketing a ball. Obviously, if you don’t pocket a ball on the break, your break shot is not
successful. The player shooting after the break will often be a heavy favorite to win the game, and you don’t want
that player to be your opponent.

     Diagram 2 illustrates a standard 9-ball break shot from the side rail. The ball easiest to pocket is the near
                                       nd
“wing ball” (the 8). The opposite 2 -row ball (the 4) also has a good chance to bank cross side. And the back
ball (the 2) often heads off the end rail to the corner up table. With appropriate speed and CB angle, the 1 ball
can be pocketed in the opposite side pocket, but the diagram shows a better strategy, where the 1 heads up table
for a shot in the bottom-left corner if you squat the CB in the center of the table after the break.

     Because it is so easy to pocket one or more balls with the break shown in Diagram 2, tournaments
sometimes place added restrictions on the CB position and/or rack to make the game more challenging and more
interesting for viewers to watch. One common rule change is to require breaking from the “box,” with the CB
within a diamond left or right of the head spot. Another common rule change is to require the 9-ball (instead of
the 1 ball) to be placed on the foot spot. This shifts the rack up table just enough to make it more difficult to
pocket a wing ball reliably. Both of these changes can make it more difficult to pocket the wing ball or the 1 ball.
But regardless of what a tournament director might attempt, the good breakers still always seem to find ways to
pocket a ball anyway. A common approach is to use a softer “cut break” where the 1 ball is hit slightly off center
to help pocket the 1 in the side or a wing ball in the corner.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     September, 2016
                               Diagram 2 9-ball-break ball direction tendencies

     Diagram 3 shows a standard 10-ball break. With a square hit, the front ball generally heads up table,
sometimes toward the corner pocket. The 2nd-row balls usually head toward the side pockets. One reason to
position the CB slightly off center is to create slightly different angles to the side pockets giving the best chance
for at least one of the 2nd-row balls to go. Also, the corner balls tend to go four rails around the table toward the
corner pockets. With a good rack and a good hit, if nothing else gets in the way, these balls often have a chance
to go. If you want to see an awesome example of an effective 10-ball break, see the video on the “break
technique” resource page in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu showing Shane Van Boening pocket 5
balls, including 4 of the balls shown in Diagram 3.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      September, 2016
                              Diagram 3 10-ball-break ball direction tendencies

     A common 8-ball power break is very much like the 10-ball break shown in Diagram 3. With a good rack and
                             nd
a good hit, the lead ball, 2 -row balls, and corner balls head to the same pockets as with the 10-ball break.
Diagram 4 shows another common 8-ball break, where you break from the side rail and target the ball in the 2nd
                                                                                                                  nd
row instead of the 1 ball. With this break, softer speed can be used, resulting in good control. If you hit the 2
ball as squarely as possible, the rack usually spreads well. Also, the 8-ball will generally move out of the rack
area. If playing under rules where pocketing the 8 on the break counts as a win (e.g., in the APA league system),
      nd
the 2 -ball break is a good option since the 8-ball motion gives you the best chance to pocket the 8 on the break.
                                                         nd
For more information and advice concerning the 8-ball 2 -ball break, see my June ’16 BD article and online video
NV G.9, which demonstrates all of the pros and cons with numerous examples.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     September, 2016
                                                nd
                           Diagram 4 8-ball 2 -ball-break ball direction tendencies

    It is important to point out that even with a consistent and accurate break shot, the balls won’t always head in
the directions indicated by the diagrams above. Things will vary some based on exactly how the racked balls sit,
and this will vary with ball and cloth conditions. A racking template can help a great deal in reducing some of the
variability from one break to the next, but they aren’t always allowed. Ball directions and motion are also affected
by the condition of the balls, cloth, and cushions. Varying the speed and exact angle of the break will also change
things some.

    Let’s close with a summary of all of the important technique elements that are required to help you break like
the pros:

     1.)     Use Only as Much Power as You Can Control
    An accurate (square) hit on the lead ball is the most important factor for a good break. Therefore, only use as
much power as you can control. If you deliver more speed to the CB, but the CB hits the lead ball at an angle, not
only do you risk jumping the CB off the table, the CB will not deliver its full energy to the rack of balls.

     2.)     Don’t Use Sidespin
    Adding sidespin, intentionally or not, is a bad thing on a power break shot. With sidespin comes squirt (CB
deflection), making it much more difficult to be accurate and consistent with your aim. Also, any energy put into
spinning the CB takes away from energy associated with the CB moving forward; so sidespin will reduce the
energy going into the rack of balls. Sidespin can also make the CB fly around the table more if your hit isn’t
square, and this can increase the risk of scratching.

     3.)     Relax
     Break technique is more about finesse and timing rather than brute force. An important element of this is
keeping the grip and wrist as relaxed as possible. A “death grip” will not add any power to the break. In fact, it
will do just the opposite by constraining and limiting full and smooth acceleration. It is okay to tighten the grip as
you approach the ball – this can help some people create a little more power – but make sure the grip is relaxed
to begin with.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       September, 2016
     4.)     Use a Longer Bridge Length
    One easy thing you can do to add more power is to lengthen your bridge. A longer bridge provides more
distance to smoothly accelerate the cue to create more cue speed. Regardless of bridge length, make sure your
bridge hand is planted firmly before and during the stroke into the ball to maintain accuracy and consistency.

     5.)     Keep the Cue as Level as Possible at Impact
    If you strike the CB with the cue elevated more than necessary to the clear the rail, the CB will hop higher on
the way to the rack, increasing the chances for the CB to hit the lead ball while airborne. This isn’t much of a
problem with a perfectly square hit, where the CB will simply hop straight up in the air; but with a hit slightly off
center, the CB can easier jump off the table.

     6.)     Accelerate Through the Ball
   Be sure to accelerate smoothly and completely into the CB and into the follow through. This helps create
more cue speed and breaking power.

     7.)     Follow Through Completely and Straight
    Make sure your follow through is straight and complete. This helps ensure tip contact-point accuracy and
fosters complete acceleration in to the ball in an unconstrained way.

     8.)     Squat the Rock
    Control the CB and “park” it in the center of the table. To do this, the CB must have slight top spin when it
reaches the head ball. The weight of the rack of balls makes the CB bounce back naturally, and slight topspin is
necessary to slow the CB to a stop close to the center of the table.

     9.)     Choose a Break Cue Wisely
     A hard tip creates more CB speed for a given stroke effort. If a phenolic tip is allowed in the rules under
which rules you play, use that … it results in the best hit efficiency. If not, use the hardest tip allowed. Also
choose a break cue with a natural pivot length well matched to your preferred break bridge length (for more
information, see the “natural pivot length” resource page in the “cue” FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu). If
this is the case, squirt (CB deflection) resulting from unintentional stroke swoop left or right will be exactly
cancelled by the change in cue direction resulting from the bridge pivot, and the CB will still head straight, even
with the stroke error (assuming your aim is good to begin with)!

     10.) Diagnose and Adjust
    Be observant of how the balls react when you break so you can make adjustments if balls are not falling.
Fiddle with CB position and speed to see what works best on a given table. Also pay attention to what your
opponent is doing if they are more successful. There’s nothing wrong with copying something that works. Also, if
playing on an unfamiliar table, check the cloth wear patterns to find the CB position and line used by most
breakers on that table. Usually the burn marks and streaks from the head string to the foot spot that are most
prominent will indicate the most successful breaking route.

     If you want more technique and strategy advice dealing with the break, see online video NV D.14 and the
“break technique” resource page in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu. The page includes numerous
video demonstrations from top breakers. I hope the information and advice in this article will help you break more
like a pro. Good luck “squatting your rock,” and remember … use only as much power as you can control.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                                      September, 2016
                    NH H.5 – Shane Van Boening Break Technique Analysis by Dr. Dave
                    NV D.14 – Pool Break Technique Advice - from Vol-III of the Billiard University instructional DVD
normal video
                        series
                    NV G.9 – 2nd-Ball 8-ball Break, from Disc IV of VEEB

PS:
      •        I am happy to announce that my entire collection of instructional DVDs (23 total to date) is now available
               for streaming via YouTube. For more info, see: dr-dave-billiards.com/stream.html.
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
               with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
               the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the Video Encyclopedias of “Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Pool Practice (VEPP),” and “Eight Ball
(VEEB),” and the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS)” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD
series, all available at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                           September, 2016
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/how_to_easily_find_your_vision_center.pdf
title: How To Easily Find Your Vision Center
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“How to Easily Find Your Vision Center”                                       ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     There are many important pool fundamentals. You need to have a consistent and purposeful pre-shot
routine. You need to be able to visualize and aim shots accurately. And you need to have a reliable and
consistent stroke. But probably one of the most important fundamentals is having your head in the right place.
Every person has a unique head position, relative to the cue, that allows that person to visualize the line of a
shot correctly. This is called the “vision center” position. For many people, the vision center is with the cue
under the nose, right between the eyes. For some, it might be with the cue directly under one eye. And for
others, it will be somewhere between or even outside of the eyes. And the vision center position is not always
correlated with which eye might be dominant or not. For example, I am right-eye dominant, but my ideal vision
center position is with the cue perfectly centered between my eyes (see Image 1). If your head is not in the
right place, you will have trouble aiming, and you miss lots of shots. In recent online video NV J.133, I
demonstrate a new and simple way to find your personal “vision center” quickly and accurately. I’ll illustrate
and summarize the important steps in this article.

                                 Image 1 Dr. Dave’s “vision center” position

     As shown in Image 2, first set up the cue ball (CB) and an object ball (OB) along a straight line in the center
of the table. Make sure you align the balls with the diamonds very carefully if you want to get accurate vision
center results. If the head spot and foot spot are clearly and accurately marked, you can use those positions,
but sometimes they don’t line up with the rail diamonds perfectly. If not, you can use a laser level to help. In
Image 2, I have the laser level over the middle diamond on the foot rail pointing straight to the middle of the
head rail. If your table has a name plate instead of a diamond on the rail, you can use a piece of chalk to help
you see the laser line so you can place a donut at the center of the plate. As demonstrated in the video, use
adhesive donuts to mark the CB and OB positions.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          June, 2023
                                               Image 2 Ball setup

     If you don’t have a laser level, don’t despair. You can be just as accurate using your eyes, using two extra
balls frozen to the head and foot cushions in the center of the table. As demonstrated in the video, just close
one eye and get down low to look over the tops of the balls. If a ball is off the line, you will be able to clearly
see it. Just nudge the ball positions until they all appear to be in a straight line.

     Image 3 shows how you can check to see if your current head alignment is accurate or not. Just aim the
CB as accurately as you can for a straight stop shot (see Image 3a). It might help to place another OB frozen
to the cushion or put a golf tee on the rail diamond to make it even easier to see the straight line of the shot. If
your head is in the correct position and if you aim very carefully, the cue should be directly over the donut or
diamond on the rail. If you glance down with your eyes only (keeping your head still), you might see something
like Image 3b. Again, if your cue is not directly over the donut or diamond, your head is not in your ideal
personal vision center position.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          June, 2023
                            a) aim                                             b) verify

                                      Image 3 Check your vision center

     If your vision center is off, here is how you can find your correct head position relative to the cue. As shown
in Image 4a, glance down with your eyes and position the cue over the donut or diamond. Because the balls
were positioned carefully, we know this is the correct line of aim. Keeping the cue still with slight pressure down
into the rail at the donut, and with the tip centered on the CB, move your head, shoulders, and side to side while
maintaining your face orientation. The aim will look bad in one direction when you go far to the right, and it will
look bad in the other direction when you go far to the left. As demonstrated in the video, move your head back
and forth looking for the position at which the shot aim looks perfect. Move smaller and smaller amounts until
you settle on what looks like the best picture of the shot. At this point, your head will be in your personal vision
center position. Glance down with your eyes so you can see where the cue is relative to your nose and eyes.
Remember how this looks, so you can check yourself periodically when down in your stance when practicing
or playing. Or if you get low in your stance like me, you can just remember where the cue touches your chin
(see Image 4b). That’s one benefit of a low stance, being able to ensure accurate vision center alignment with
a chin touch. I touch my chin to the cue before every shot as part of my pre-shot routine.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          June, 2023
                              a) check                                             b) find

                                          Image 4 Find your vision center

    The good thing about this new method for finding your vision center is you are in your natural shooting
position, addressing a CB and aiming at an OB, with your grip, cue, and hand bridge all in place. Also, you
don’t need to shoot a single shot. That’s important because sometimes misses are caused by a bad stroke and
not bad aim or visual alignment. If you want to test and improve your stroke, see the videos and info on the
stroke “best practices” FAQ resource page at billiards.colostate.edu. If you trust your stroke, online video
NV J.133 shows several useful shooting drills to test both your vision center alignment and stroke straightness.

   I hope the info here and in the online video helps you find your ideal personal vision center position. And I
hope this helps you be more effective with aiming and shot making. For more info and help, see the vision
center FAQ resource page at billiards.colostate.edu.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV J.133 – AIM MORE ACCURATELY by Finding Your Ideal Personal VISION CENTER
   normal video

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                            June, 2023
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/how_to_get_a_tight_rack.pdf
title: How To Get A Tight Rack
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“How to Get a Tight Rack”                                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at drdavepoolinfo.com. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    In an online video I posted recently (NV L.93), I discuss and demonstrate useful techniques for making sure
the balls are racked as tightly as possible. This will make your break shots much more effective. I’ll summarize
some of the important “hot tips” here.

    The easiest and most effective way to get a tight rack is to use a racking template, if it is allowed. A racking
template (see Image 1) is a thin sheet of plastic or paper with hole cutouts that help push the balls against one
another. The template remains under the balls during the break and is usually removed from the table after the
break. To use a racking template, place the front hole in the desired position and place the balls in the holes
from front to back. As demonstrated in the video, sometimes you will need to push and rotate the balls toward
the center to help them settle over the template. With balls that are new and in good condition, and with a
template that is not too worn, all the balls will be touching, allowing for a good break.

                                          Image 1 Racking template

     An alternative to using a racking template is to “train the table,” where you firmly tap down on the balls in
their desired racking positions (see Image 2) to make small marks and indentations in the cloth (see Image 3)
so the balls will naturally settle against each other naturally. This is done routinely in European pool events. It
can help to use a training template for this purpose. Some are available on the “how to get a tight rack” resource
page at drdavepoolinfo.com. Alternatively, as demonstrated in online video NV I.3, you can just use a racking
triangle or racking template to help position the balls for tapping. See the details in the video for advice on how
to train a table accurately and effectively.

Billiards Digest                                       1                                              December 2025
                                             Image 2 Training a table

                             Image 3 Trained table cloth marks and indentations

    When using a standard racking triangle instead, there are many ways to help ensure you get a tight rack.
Below is a summary of “best practices” advice for racking, all of which are demonstrated in detail in the video:

     •    First find where the lead ball wants to settle and rack the balls behind it, in this position. The ideal
          position might not always be in the center of the foot spot. This is probably the most important advice.

     •    Pushing the balls in the rack toward the center and down (from the back) can help them freeze together
          (see Image 4).

     •    Spinning the perimeter balls toward the center can help them push the cloth fibers outward, allowing
          the balls to better sit in place.

     •    If any of the perimeter balls roll out of place, they can be tapped down into position with another ball or
          the rack.

Billiards Digest                                        2                                              December 2025
     •    If there are gaps between balls in the rack, sometimes turning the balls or rearranging their positions
          can help, especially if the balls are old, worn, and slightly out of round. Sometimes, flipping the rack
          upside down or turning it can also help, especially if the rack itself is irregular, worn, or dirty.

     •    When removing the rack, lift the back first and then slide it forward away from the front ball.

     •    If the lead ball is sticking to the inside of the rack, causing it to move when you try to tilt or move the
          rack forward to remove it, clean the rack or spin it to use a less dirty corner.

     •    If the balls do not sit well, sometimes brushing or wiping the cloth in the rack area before racking can
          help.

                              •

                          •   Image 4 Pushing the balls down and forward from behind

     Special care is required when the balls are old and worn. First, you should make sure that any balls that
are smaller than the others are placed in the back row, preferably in the corners. Slight ball size differences
can be common, especially with older balls that might have worn unevenly over time. The 1-ball is often the
smallest since it takes the most abuse when at the front of the rack. As demonstrated in the video, to help find
any small balls in a 15-ball rack, hold the rack while pushing forward on the entire back row (see Image 5). Any
balls that are small will rotate while you slide the rack back and forth. If you move a smaller ball to a back
corner, you can more easily get a tight rack since the smaller ball will be able to touch all neighbors, which is
not the case if it is next to four slightly larger balls. As demonstrated in the video, with a smaller ball moved
from the middle of the rack to the back, none of the balls rotate when the rack is slid, indicated that there are
likely no gaps between the balls.

Billiards Digest                                        3                                              December 2025
                                      Image 5 Sliding the rack to find small balls

    If you want to rack and break as well as the pros, try out all the techniques demonstrated in online video
NV I.3. It can also help to have good break technique. If you want help with that, check out the videos and info
on the “break shot technique advice” resource page at drdavepoolinfo.com. A tight rack is not guaranteed to
give you a good break; but if the rack is not tight, it is unlikely you will have good and consistent break results.

      Happy racking, and good luck with your game from Dr. Dave!

                   NV I.3 – How to Train a Pool Table for Accurate and Consistent Ball Racking, an excerpt from
                        VENT-I
   normal video    NV L.93 – HOW TO RACK Pool Balls as Tightly as Possible

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at drdavepoolinfo.com.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                         4                                              December 2025
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/how_to_rack_and_break_9_ball_like_a_pro.pdf
title: How To Rack And Break 9 Ball Like A Pro
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“How to Rack and Break 9-ball Like a Pro”                                  ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference
numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     Do you have strategies when racking and breaking in 9-ball? Do you know what to do when you cannot
get a tight rack? Do you know how to determine if an opponent is attempting to gain an unfair advantage
through rack manipulation? If you do not have good or complete answers to these questions, you are in the
right place.

Break Strategy
     Let’s begin with break strategy, assuming the rack of balls is aligned properly and tight, with all balls
touching. If you have trouble achieving a tight rack, the “racking” FAQ page at billiards.colostate.edu offers
lots of advice. With a tight rack, the best strategy is to pocket the wing ball (the 4 ball in Diagram 1).
Breaking from the side, with the cue ball (CB) close to the long rail, using a square hit on the 1 is the most
reliable way to do this. You should always strive to “squat the rock” … in other words, park the CB close to
the center of the table after the break. If you do not know how to do this, see the “break squat” FAQ page at
billiards.colostate.edu. Online video NV J.2 demonstrates the break illustrated in Diagram 1, where I show
that break speed has little or no effect on wing ball direction. I also show that the wing ball goes over a wide
range of hits on the 1.

     Obviously, in addition to pocketing a ball on the break, you would also like to have an open shot after the
break. As shown in Diagram 1, with a square hit from the side, the 1 ball tends to head above the side
pocket. With slow speed, you can get a look at the 1 in the side; and with medium speed, you can get a look
at the 1 in the top-left corner. Faster speed is also a good option, especially if the 3-point break rule is in
effect, where you need to pocket and/or drive at least three object balls above the head string. With fast
speed, you have a good margin for error to get a look at the 1 ball in the bottom-left corner, assuming you
“squat the rock.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                     March, 2018
                                            Diagram 1 Side break

     Since the side break can be “too effective,” some tournaments require that you break from a limited-size
“box” in the “kitchen” (behind the “head string”). Sometimes the “box” is a centered 2x2 diamond square; but,
more often, it is only 18” wide as shown in Diagram 2. To pocket the wing ball on the break from the “box,”
you need to use a cut break, where you hit the 1 off-center (on the wing-ball side) instead of square. You aim
to hit the 1 in the same spot you target with a square hit using a side break. With a cut break, there is a limit
to how much power you can use, because the CB can easily bounce off the table with too much speed.
Therefore, with a 3-point break rule, the cut break can be a little risky because you might not drive enough
object balls to the head string.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      March, 2018
                                     Diagram 2 Cut break from the “box”

     With a cut break, the 1 also tends to head toward the side pocket with the right amount of cut (see
Diagram 2). If you hit the 1 close to square from the “box,” the 1 will typically go above the side and the wing
ball will typically go above the corner. If you cut the 1 too much, it heads below the side. The back ball, in
this case the 2, usually heads up table for a shot after the break if you pocket the 1. Sometimes, it can even
go into the bottom-left corner.

     As we will see later, it is possible to pocket the 9 on the break (called a “golden break”) if there is a gap in
the rack behind the 9 ball. Diagram 3 shows a “more legitimate” way to do it with a tight and un-manipulated
rack. Using a cut break, the CB can be bounced off the side rail and into the 9 which would still be in place,
since it doesn’t move during the break with a tight rack. It is difficult to be precise with the exact CB direction
off the rail, but the 9 has a chance to go in 4 different pockets with different hits on the 9. You need to be
lucky with this approach; but if it works, you win the game on the break without needing to hit another shot.
Even if you do not luck the 9 in, you still might pocket the wing ball or the 1 to continue shooting.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          March, 2018
                                    Diagram 3 Legitimate “golden break”

     Because it is so easy to pocket the wing ball with a good rack, either from the side or from the “box,”
some tournaments also require racking with the 9 (instead of the 1) on the foot spot as shown in Diagram 4.
Because the rack is farther up table, the wing ball will go above the corner with a square hit, making it more
difficult to pocket a ball on the break. With the 9 on the spot, a square hit will usually send the 1 fairly close to
the side. In fact, pocketing the 1 in the side is one approach for defeating the 9-on-the-spot countermeasure.
However, the 1-ball direction can be very sensitive to the square-ness of the hit and any gaps in the rack.
Another option is to use a cut break to send the wing ball farther down table to the corner. Sometimes, you
can also get the 1 to bank into the bottom-left corner.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          March, 2018
                                     Diagram 4 9-on-the-spot cut break

    Obviously, if you do not have an accurate and consistent break, you will not be able to take best
advantage of the information and strategies in this article. If you want to improve your break technique, the
“break technique advice” FAQ page at billiards.colostate.edu offers lots of tips and guidance.

Rack Manipulation
    Everything above dealt with break strategy for a proper rack. Sometimes, conditions can make it difficult
to achieve a proper rack, and some people cheat by purposely manipulating the rack to their advantage. One
way to cheat, shown in Diagram 5 is to tilt the rack alignment to one side. As we saw above, with a break
from the “box,” the wing ball should go high with a square hit of a tight rack. As shown in Diagram 5, turning
the rack slightly can allow the wing ball to be pocketed on one side, with the other wing ball going even
higher. For a demonstration of the rack-tilt cheat, see online video NV J.3.

   One advantage of breaking from the “box” with a square hit, assuming the wing ball goes, is the 1 ball will
head toward the corner pocket up table, usually resulting in a good look at the 1 after the break. Online video
NV J.2 provides convincing demonstrations of this technique.

     Cheating the rack alignment might be a little obvious to an opponent or ref, especially if there are racking
lines or marks drawn on the table. Nevertheless, another important message here is to be very careful with
alignment when you are racking; otherwise, you will get inconsistent results.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      March, 2018
                                    Diagram 5 Rack alignment tilt cheat

    Now we will look at what happens when the rack is not tight, with gaps between some of the balls. This
can occur on a worn table with old balls, where it might be impossible to get a tight rack, even by training the
table (see online video NV I.3) or using a racking template. However, it can also occur because the racker is
manipulating the rack to create intentional gaps in specific places. It is illegal and unethical to purposely
create gaps when racking, for yourself or an opponent; but sometimes gaps are unavoidable, so it can help to
understand the effects gaps create.

    Diagram 6 shows an important example. If the rack is solid through the 1-3-9-6 path, and if there are
gaps anywhere around the 4, the energy of the hit will move the 6 forward some before the 4 moves, allowing
the 4 to go more forward than would occur with a tight rack. Here, there are gaps between the 2&3, 2&9,
2&4, 4&9, and 4&6. These gaps make it easy to pocket the wing 4 ball. In addition, as mentioned above,
with a square hit from the “box,” it is easy to get a shot at the 1 in the corner after the break. For a
demonstration of this wing-ball-gap cheat, see online video NV J.3.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     March, 2018
                              Diagram 6 Wing-ball-gap cheat from the “box”

     Diagram 7 shows another common rack-manipulation cheat, where the back ball (the 8) is feathered
away from the rack. Here, there is a gap between the 6&8. Just as with the wing-ball-gap cheat above, this
allows the wing 4 ball to go more forward since there is less mass on the 6&8-ball side of the 4 providing less
resistance to the 4 ball as the 2 ball drives it forward. In addition, again, as mentioned above, with a square
hit from the “box,” it is easy to get a shot at the 1 in the corner after the break. For a demonstration of the
back-ball-gap cheat, see online video NV J.3.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    March, 2018
                              Diagram 7 Back ball gap cheat from the “box”

     Diagram 8 shows another particularly sinister 9-ball racking cheat that allows one to achieve a “golden
break” for the win. When there are no gaps in the rack, the 9 ball does not move from the rack area unless it
is kissed by a moving ball. However, with gaps in the rack, that is no longer true. With a gap between the
6&9, the 9 ball has room to kiss off the 7 toward the corner. Breaking from the same side of the table as the
gap, in this case on the 6 side, gives the best chance to pocket the 9. The CB will send energy through the 1
and 3 into the 9 so it can kiss off the 7. The gap between the 6&9 gives the 6 just enough time to clear. The
ideal CB direction will depend on the gap size and other gaps in the rack; but in general, try shooting from the
“box” along a line just past the 1st diamond, as shown in the diagram. As with the legitimate “golden break” in
Diagram 3, the 9 will not go every time; but when it does, you get the easy “victory.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                     March, 2018
                                           Diagram 8 “Golden break” gap cheat

   Before you break, always inspect the rack to see if there are any gaps, and ask for a re-rack if there are.
Moreover, if gaps are unavoidable, change your break strategy to take advantage of the gaps if possible,
based on the effects and examples covered above. Here is a concise summary of good basic strategy:

          •        If the rack is tight, use a square hit from the side to pocket the wing ball.

          •        If required to break from the “box,” or if the 9 is on the spot, use a cut break to pocket the 1 in
                   side or the wing ball in corner.

          •        If the rack alignment is tilted, or if there are gaps in one side of the rack, or if the rack is solid
                   except for the back ball, break from the “box” with a square hit to pocket the wing ball and get
                   easy shape on the 1.

     All of the shots, strategies, and ball-path effects in this article, along with many others for both 9-ball and
10-ball are demonstrated and described in detail on Disc I of the Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball
(VENT-I) available at DrDaveBilliards.com. If you want to explore the effects of gaps further, see Joe
Tucker’s “Racking Secrets” books and DVDs (available at JoeTucker.info). Joe discovered many gap
effects and rack-reading strategies over the years and has taught many players how to apply this knowledge
to their benefit.

    Another way to cheat with racking is to “pattern rack,” where you purposely put balls in certain positions to
create an advantage. Corey Deuel has been famous for utilizing many of these strategies over the years.
For numerous examples, see the “pattern racking” FAQ page at billiards.colostate.edu. Also see my
October, 2017 BD article and online video NV I.2 dealing with Corey’s 9-ball soft-break-pattern-rack cheat.

Derby City Classic Controversy
     If you were at the Derby City Classic (DCC) this year, or if you have seen online videos NV J.2 and NV
J.3, you will know that there was a huge controversy dealing with rack manipulation at the event. If you want
to learn more, see the links in the YouTube video descriptions of NV J.2 and NV J.3 that provide easy access
to a video of the last rack of the infamous match between Jayson Shaw and Shane VanBoening, the photo of

Billiards Digest                                                                                              March, 2018
the suspect rack Jayson captured with his phone during the match, and Shane’s Facebook reply to the
accusations. Diagram 6 is the cheat Jayson was accusing Shane of using during their match. Dennis Orcollo
was using the same cheat during the tournament. Shane and Dennis were the only players not breaking from
the side, and they were fairly consistently pocketing the wing ball with a square hit from the “box” while also
getting shape on the 1 in the upper corner. That creates a big advantage; although (maybe rightfully so), the
advantage wasn’t big enough for either of them to win the tournament.

    If a referee racks for you and there are gaps in the rack, either by accident or because it is difficult or
impossible to get a tight rack with given conditions, or if an unscrupulous opponent racks for you and
purposely creates gaps that might be unfavorable, then the knowledge presented in this article, on VENT-I,
and in Joe Tucker’s material can help you choose the best CB position and type of hit to take advantage of
the gaps. That is called “reading the rack.” Obviously, you need to carefully inspect the rack before
breaking, if that is allowed. This year’s DCC was a “rack your own” event. If you are racking for yourself, and
you purposely create gaps in certain positions, and break in a style that takes advantage of those gaps, rack
after rack, then you are blatantly cheating with “rack manipulation,” which is unethical and unprofessional.

    Below is a pertinent entry from the official rules of pool (The WPA World Standardized Rules). The key
phrases pertaining to both rack manipulation and pattern racking are bolded. I think it is crystal clear to most
people reading this rule that it is illegal to manipulate rack gaps or ball patterns.

                   2.2 Nine Ball Rack

                   The object balls are racked as tightly as possible in a diamond shape, with the one ball at the
                   apex of the diamond and on the foot spot and the nine ball in the middle of the diamond. The
                   other balls will be placed in the diamond without purposeful or intentional pattern.

    So how can we change 9-ball tournament rules to prevent rack manipulation and pattern racking?
Obviously you cannot let the players rack for themselves or for each other. From many past examples of
abuse, some (if not many) players cannot be trusted to rack honestly and fairly. There must be one or more
neutral people (e.g., trusted referees or volunteers) who circulate among the tournament tables racking for all
games, especially in the later rounds of a tournament. If neutral rackers are not available, it should be made
perfectly clear in the pre-tournament players’ meeting that pattern racking and rack manipulation are not
allowed, will not be tolerated, and will result in severe penalties (for example, disqualification from the
tournament).

     The DCC has a reputation as a gamblers’ event, and there is a long tradition and history with playing 9-
ball the way it has always been played, without all of the new rules and breaking limitations. One option going
forward is foster an “anything goes” attitude at the DCC. Allow rack your own, pattern racking, soft breaks,
gap manipulation, etc. It would be interesting to see who can best master all of the cheats and execute them
the most consistently, while still controlling the CB and getting a look at the 1 (or the 2). To go deep in the
tournament, one would still need to be able to run out consistently and win safety battles when they arise.
With a “winner breaks” format, the possibility of huge comebacks or a dominating performance with large
“packages” of strung-together break&runs are also crowd-pleasing possibilities.

     I think the best solution for most 9-ball tournaments is to use a combination of all of the measures
developed to “fix” the 9-ball break. First of all, racking templates should be used or the tables should be
trained, and a trusted neutral person should rack so everybody gets a fair and legal rack in every game. Also,
if using templates, make sure the racking area is marked making proper alignment easy. Also require
breaking from the narrow “box” with the 9 on the spot, and enforce the 3-point break rule. All of these
measures will help ensure that the best and most well-rounded players go deep in the tournament.

    Alternatively, we could propose something totally different like “shoot after the break” (even if you do not
pocket a ball), “opponent shoot after the break,” or “push out after the break.” An “alternating break” format
could also be used to prevent a large “packages” of runs due to any breaking advantage (due to skill or luck).
However, it would be a shame to lose tournament historical continuity and miss out on the fun and excitement
of watching “packages” of break&runs.

    Well, I hope you see 9-ball racking and breaking with a keener eye in the future and do your best to help
prevent abuses of the rules. It is time for the cheating to stop.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        March, 2018
Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV I.2 – 9-ball Side Soft Break, and Corey Deuel Pattern Racking, an excerpt from VENT-I
                    NV I.3 – How to Train a Pool Table for Accurate and Consistent Ball Racking, an excerpt from
                         VENT-I
normal video        NV J.2 – 9-Ball Break Strategy and Effects
                    NV J.3 – 9-Ball Rack Manipulation and Breaking Cheats

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        March, 2018
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/how_to_reach_shots_tough_to_reach.pdf
title: How To Reach Shots Tough To Reach
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“How to Reach Shots Tough to Reach”                                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

      In a recent online video (NV L.71), I demonstrated many ways to reach shots that are tough to reach. I
show and discuss some of the most useful techniques here. One way to reach long shots is to simply move
your grip to the end of the cue and increase your bridge length. You just need to be careful to keep things as
still as possible during the stroke. Because it is difficult to keep a longer stroke straight with a really long bridge,
it helps to use a shorter stroke. Having a longer cue can help, especially when a long reach is required.
Because I am tall, I keep a joint extension in my cue. This lets me reach longer shots with greater ease. A
common alternative is to use a temporary butt extension. Just be aware that extensions add weight to the cue,
so it can affect your speed and spin control. As with all techniques discussed, see the video for demonstrations
and shot examples.

    To reach a long shot, it can help to lean on and over the table as shown in Image 1a. When you are
stretched and a little uncomfortable like this, it is very important to try to be as still as possible during the stroke
since there is a natural tendency to move out of the position. For a long stretch, you can even put one leg up
on the table as shown in Image 1b. And for shots close to a rail, you can lean on and reach over the table from
the side as shown in Image 1c. Do your best to keep your vision center over the cue; otherwise, you won’t
perceive the line of the shot correctly.

                    a) leg lean                                     b) leg up                     c) over the side

                                                  Image 1 Leaning

     Sometimes, it helps to sit on the rail to reach a shot, shooting behind your back if necessary (see Image
2a). Be aware that the rules require that part of at least one foot must be in contact with the floor. It is difficult
to stroke straight with the cue behind the back like this; but with a little practice, it can be reliable. Sitting on the
table, again with one foot on the floor, also helps with shots like the one shown in Image 2b. If you put a bent
leg on top of the table, you can get even closer, assuming you are flexible (see Image 2c). It helps to have
long legs, to be able to reach the floor with the other foot.

Billiards Digest                                         1                                                  February 2025
             a) behind the back               b) behind the back                     c) behind the back

                                                Image 2 Sitting

     An alternative to reaching behind your back is to just use the opposite hand to shoot. I am not very good
at this because I have never really practiced it before, and I’m a little spastic with my left hand. Because there
are so many other effective options, I don’t really see a need to try to learn to shoot well with my opposite hand.
But if you are at least a little ambidextrous, this might be a good option. Otherwise, I think time is better spent
learning to master the mechanical bridge or other techniques.

    Image 3a shows an example jump shot that is difficult to reach with either a standard stance or a sidearm
stance. But using a dart stroke with a shortened jump cue instead, it is very easy and comfortable to reach.
The dart stroke jump technique is very easy to master. See the videos on the jump shot advice resource page
at billiards.colostate.edu if you want to learn it. The dart stroke can also be used for other elevated shots like
when reaching over an obstacle ball (see Image 3b). Even though I’m not hitting a jump shot, the jump cue
and dart stroke make it easy to reach this shot.

                         a) jump                                                 b) reach

                                              Image 3 Dart stroke

    When none of the other methods work effectively, you can instead use a mechanical bridge. The videos
on the mechanical bridge technique advice resource page at billiards.colostate.edu cover everything in
great detail, but the main tips are (see Image 4a): Get as low as possible, stabilize the bridge on the table with
the non-shooting hand, and hold your elbow out to the side with a dart type grip, being careful to move the cue
as straight as possible. With a cue extension, you can instead use a regular stance and stroke with a
mechanical bridge (see Image 4b). I prefer this method when I need more power or control since it feels more
natural. When you need to reach far and over an obstacle ball, using a taller bridge is necessary, but most

Billiards Digest                                      2                                               February 2025
bridge heads can be turned to provide the necessary height (see Image 4c). For a shot like this, I prefer to
point my elbow down instead, for a standard dart stroke. And if you need to reach over a group of balls, stacking
and extending one bridge on another can get the job done (see the video for a demonstration).

              a) standard                               b) normal stroke                             c) elevated

                                          Image 4 Mechanical bridge

    If there are no balls in the way, you can lay the cue on the table, pinch under the cue at the joint to raise
the tip a little, and hit the butt of the cue with your hand (see Image 5a). I can easily create draw for shape on
the 8 in the side. This technique is surprisingly reliable. Give it a try. Another alternative is a reverse stroke.
One approach (see Image 5b) is to place the cue on the table along the required line of aim, and bridge from
the pocket side, with the hand held firmly on the table. I need to be careful not to double hit the 11, so I use a
dart-type grip close to the bridge hand. Flicking the wrist into the bridge hand with a high tip position will enable
the cue ball to go forward with a single hit. Another reverse stroke useful if there are many balls in the way of
other techniques is shown in Image 5b. I’m using a jump cue (for short length) and bridging on my leg on the
table for support. This type of reverse stroke is a nice trick to know if you ever need it.

                        a) push                                  b) reverse                    c) leg support

                                           Image 5 Specialty bridges

    I hope you learned a few new ways to be effective when needing to reach for shots. As always, be sure to
watch the online video (NV L.71) to see demonstrations of everything, and click on the links in the YouTube
video description for more information and examples.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV L.71 – Pool Made Simple … HOW TO REACH Tough-to-Reach SHOTS
   normal video

Billiards Digest                                       3                                                February 2025
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
          with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
          to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                        4                                               February 2025
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/improved_2_to_1_system.pdf
title: Improved 2 To 1 System
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Improved 2-to-1 System”                                                    ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     On the bank/kick resource page at billiards.colostate.edu, I cover many important and useful diamond
systems for aiming all types of kicks and banks. The most basic and important system is the through-diamond
rolling-ball 2-to-1 system shown in Diagram 1. In recent online videos NV L.33 and NV L.35, I demonstrate
the system and show how to make aiming adjustments when necessary. I also show a wide range of game
situation examples that demonstrate the usefulness of the improved system. In this column, I summarize some
of the important basics.

     The 2-to-1 system is easy to understand and apply at the table. If you roll the cue ball (CB) along any 2-
to-1 track (2-to-1, 3-to-1.5, 4-to-2, 5-to-2.5, or anything in between), the CB will kick to the corner. As I
demonstrate in the videos, the system can also be used to target balls away from the corner or in the open, and
it can also be easily modified to account for other shot speeds. The system can also be used for long kicks off
a short rail and rolling banks off any rail.

                                   Diagram 1 2-to1 Rolling Kick System

     When shooting from above the 5-to-2.5 line, rolling kicks or banks will go long. As shown in Image 1 from
the second video, if you first observe how long the CB heads on a test shot, you can figure out how much
correction is required on the aiming rail, which can be useful to know during a game. As demonstrated in the
video, when kicking along the 6-to-3 line, the CB goes long of the target (see “2e” in Image 1). Since everything
is 2-to-1, simply adjust your aim up table by half the error (see “e” in Image 1) to get an accurate hit.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     January, 2024
                                   Image 1 Aim correction on 6-to-3 track

    My table plays close to what should be expected on most tables under typical conditions. Although larger
adjustments would be required on Diamond brand tables that typically bank very short, based on the info and
demos at the link in the YouTube video description. But, as players, we always need to be able to adjust to
table and environmental conditions. That's why it is important to do test shots like these on an unfamiliar table,
so you will know how much to adjust relative to system aims.

    Before continuing, I want to stress the importance of being extremely careful to hit the CB on the vertical
centerline when using the 2-to-1 system. If you have even a hair of running spin, you will miss the target long.
And if you have even a hair of reverse spin, you will miss the target short.

     As I demonstrate in the videos, when the CB is between two reference lines, you can simply adjust relative
to the lines. In Image 2, the CB is exactly between the 4-to-2 and 5-to-2.5 lines, so the required aim point is
right in middle. If the CB is not exactly between the lines, you can do a 2-to-1 pivot relative to the closest line
to find the required line of aim. Doing a parallel-shift relative to the reference lines, as some people suggest, is
not very accurate, especially when the CB is far from a line. As I demonstrate for the shot in Image 2, a parallel-
shift from the 4-to-2 line to the CB sends the ball well short of the target, and a parallel-shift from the 5-to-2.5
line goes well long.

                                      Image 2 Aiming between the lines
Billiards Digest                                                                                       January, 2024
    To be accurate with the system, you always need to do a 2-to-1 pivot relative to the system reference lines.
For example, Image 3 shows a 2-to-1 pivot from the 4-to-2 line. The cue cross-over point on the near rail must
always move twice as far as the aim point on the kicking rail, until the line is over the CB position.

                                 Image 3 2-to-1 pivot between references lines

      The rail-tip aim adjustment on each track (for example, the adjustment “e” in Image 1) needs to be used
properly for it to be helpful at different CB positions. For example, in Image 4, the CB is on the 6-to-3 line, but
if you just move the tip on the rail the amount we found earlier and aim at that spot, the CB will come up well
short. When I found the aim adjustment, I had the cue over diamond 6, so you first need to pivot the cue to the
adjusted tip position, keeping the cue over diamond 6 (see the red line in Image 4). Then, you need to do a 2-
to-1 pivot to the CB to find the correct line of aim (see the white line in Image 4). Again, after you pivot, make
sure the amount you moved the butt (“2x” in Image 4) is twice as much as the amount you moved the tip (“x” in
Image 4). As demonstrated in the video, if the CB is farther away from the kicking rail, the process is the same,
but the aim point will be slightly different. I know this shift-and-pivot technique sounds a little complicated at
first; but, after a little practice, it is fast and easy to do. It is also very accurate for all CB positions. The process
will become much clearer after you watch and try the examples in the video.

                                     Image 4 Shift-and-pivot aim correction
Billiards Digest                                                                                             January, 2024
    One alternative to using the system and corrections presented above is to just practice kicks so much that
you develop a feel for how much to adjust your aim for different angles and CB positions. But that could take
a long time, and it still might not be as effective, especially when playing on an unfamiliar table.

     I hope the videos help you become effective with the 2-to-1 rolling-ball kicking and banking system,
including how to accurately make aiming adjustments, when required. Be sure to try everything at the table
one step at a time if you want to start using this modified system during play.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV L.33 – The DIAMOND SYSTEM You Must Know … And How to Make it Better
   normal video
                   NV L.35 – Kicking System Aim Corrections and Parallel Shift Clarifications

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          January, 2024
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/inelastic_collision_and_the_hertz_theory_of_impact.html
title: Inelastic collision and the Hertz theory of impact
topics: collisions_and_impacts, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
Technical - Inelastic collision and the Hertz theory of impact
.
Technical
Inelastic collision and
the Hertz theory of impact
American Journal of Physics, Vol. 68, No. 10, pp. 920-924, October 2000
©2000 American Association of Physics Teachers. All rights reserved.
D. Gugan
H. H. Wills Physics Laboratory, Royal Fort, Bristol BS8 1TL, United Kingdom
Received: 19 May 1999; accepted: 2 December 1999
The area, A, and the duration of contact, T, have been measured as a function of impact speed, U, for balls striking a flat surface. The balls lost about 40% of their kinetic energy over the range of speeds studied, but, surprisingly, the results for A(U) and T(U) appear to be consistent with Hertz's elastic theory of impact. Possible reasons are discussed for this unexpected behaviour. © 2000 American Association of Physics Teachers. [S0002-9505(00)01405-7]
Contents
I. INTRODUCTION
II. EXPERIMENT
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Contact areas, A, and times, T
B. Coefficient of restitution, e
C. The Hertz theory and inelastic collision
IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
REFERENCES
TABLES
I. INTRODUCTION
The physics of collision has been studied at least since Newton's time. Much of the interest has been in the longitudinal collision of cylinders to see whether elastic wave propagation could explain the experimental results, but balls have also been studied, and Hertz devised a quasistatic, elastic theory to describe their behaviour. Bell1 gives a survey of much of the early work, while Cross2 has recently performed experiments on balls which are relevant here.
Hertz calculated the deformation at contact between isotropic, homogeneous bodies with spherical surfaces in the static, linear, elastic approximation (see Love3, and Landau and Lifshitz4, for accessible references, while a simpler, approximate treatment has been given by Leroy5 - who also includes the full Hertz results for comparison). Hertz's theory relates the compressions, z1 and z2, at the two surfaces to the force between them, and to the radii and the elastic moduli of the two bodies. Simplifying his general expressions to the case of interest here, where a ball of radius R is pressed onto a flat surface by a normal force, F, one finds that the total compression of the surfaces, z(≡z1 +z2), is given by
where X1 and X2 are elastic coefficients for the two bodies, with
where σ and E are Poisson's ratio and Young's modulus, respectively. Integrating (1) gives a static, elastic potential energy function which is proportional to z5/2. The assumption that Eq. (1) can be applied to the dynamic impact of a ball striking the surface, and that the sum of kinetic and elastic stored energy during collision is constant, then yields the maximum compression, zmax ≡ h. h depends on the initial impact speed, U, and on the reduced mass of the colliding bodies - which is just the mass of the ball here, M, since it falls on a body of effectively infinite mass. The Hertz theory thus predicts that h is given by
The time taken to reach maximum compression is given by an elliptic integral over the compression, and for an elastic collision the total duration of contact, T, is twice this calculated time,
In practice, a more convenient parameter than h for experimental measurement is the area of the common circle of contact, A, which Hertz's theory shows is given by A = π Rh. The experimental parameters A and T thus have a characteristic dependence on U,
where the power of 0.8 in the first of these expressions arises because the potential energy of compression is proportional to h5/2, and the two exponents in (5) necessarily differ by unity.
The Hertz equations can be rearranged to give ratios of measured quantities which should remain independent of the impact speed, U,
and
These are used later, as is also a ratio which is, in addition, independent of the elastic moduli involved in the collision,
Hertz's theory can be tested by measurements of the functional form of A(U) and T(U) in Eq. (5), but as is discussed below, the best test is probably obtained by calculating the ratio of Eq. (8). There has been no detailed experimental confirmation of Hertz's theory which fully considers the elastic behaviour under impact conditions - both its linearity, and the conservation of energy6 - but it appears to be commonly accepted as essentially correct, at least for impact speeds that are small compared with the speed of sound in the bodies involved3. The assumptions of the theory clearly limit its range, depending on the elastic behaviour of the materials involved, and inelastic collision must introduce loss terms into the energy balance equation. These loss terms cannot be specified in general; however, it is clear that the predictions of the theory should be affected systematically as the energy loss increases. A convenient measure of energy loss is the coefficient of restitution, e, the inverse of the ratio of the relative speeds of approach and separation, before and after collision. When, as here, all the kinetic energy is carried by the ball (since the body it collides with is so heavy it is always at rest), the relative loss of kinetic energy is given by K(U) ≡ (1-e2(U)).
The present results came from a student project on the coefficient of restitution between croquet balls and mallets, made in order to establish the variations which exist for typical equipment. The project included some measurements of the area and duration of contact, but it was only much later realised that these appear to agree with Hertz's theory of impact,despite the loss of about 40% of the kinetic energy of the collision. This unexpected agreement was surprising, and it is discussed in what follows.
II. EXPERIMENT
A test anvil was made from a cylinder of steel weighing 70 kg (about 150 times the mass of the ball) equipped so that mallet heads could be firmly clamped to it. The coefficient of restitution, e, was found by dropping a ball from varying heights either on to the mallet face, or onto the smooth surface of the anvil, and measuring its speed before and after impact. The apparatus is shown in Fig. 1. Vertical drops gave impact speeds of 2-6 m s-1, while for speeds of 0.5-2 m s-1 the anvil assembly was turned on its side and the ball swung by a long, light, bifilar suspension so as to make impact at the bottom of its swing; in both cases the impact was normal to the surface, with negligible rotation. The ball interrupted a laser ray as it fell, which triggered a digital timer and thus allowed its mean speed at the ray height to be found. The ratio of the times measured before and after impact, r ≡ t1/t2, gives an approximate value of e; however, correction is needed for the extra acceleration between the ray position and the point of impact. Impact speeds calculated from corrected values of t1 agreed with the values expected for fall under gravity from the known initial heights. Values of e(U) were usually reproducible within ± 0.002. For example, ten vertical drops at 2 m s-1 gave a speed ratio r = 0.733(1) (i.e., 0.733 ± 0.001), giving e = 0.827(1) after correction, while at the same speed in the pendulum tests, r was 0.823(1), which corrected to e = 0.824(1).
Fig. 1. drop mode impact tests.
The area of contact, A, was obtained from impressions made on a piece of carbon paper or thin foil; the impressions were usually close to circular, though somewhat irregular, and the values of A were not significantly affected by the thickness of the layer. The duration of contact, T, was measured by adapting the timing system so that the start and stop pulses were produced by the make and break of electrical contact of the impact surfaces, each of which was covered by a very thin layer of conductor. The standard deviations of the measured contact areas were ± 5 mm2, and of the times, ± 0.02 ms.
The ball used was a Jaques "Eclipse" ball (commonly used in the game of croquet), which fell on a wooden mallet. The ball is rather similar to a golf ball (but bigger, with M = 454 g and R = 46 mm), and has a core of a proprietary composite material contained within a plastic shell
≈
2 mm thick. The ball had a coefficient of restitution close to the value of the golf ball reported by Cross2 (cf. Sec. III C 2). The mallet was a typical, well-used old mallet of unrecorded wood and grain, but with good flat faces.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Contact areas, A, and times, T
Results averaged over ten measurements are shown in Table I. The data were compared with Hertz's theory using weighted, least-squares, log-log fits. This gave exponents of 0.77 ± 0.03 and -0.23 ± 0.03 for A(U) and T(U), respectively, compared with values of 0.8 and -0.2 given by Eqs. (5).
Table I. Impact measurements for the Jaques croquet ball on wood (and coefficient of restitution on steel) at different speeds. The quantities in the three columns on the right are constant according to Hertz's theory: A/UT is expected to equal 1.068R, i.e., 49.1 mm; the other two columns depend on the elastic constants of the surfaces, see the text. The values in parentheses indicate the uncertainty in the preceding digit.
Impact
speed, U
(m/s)
Contact
area, A
(mm2)
Contact
time, T
(ms)
Coefficient
of restitution,
e, on steel
A/UT
(m)
×103
A1/2T2
(ms2)
×1010
A5/2/U2
(m3 s2)
×1012
2.19
107
0.97
0.805
50(3)
97(5)
25(3)
2.78
126
0.90
0.796
50(3)
91(5)
23(3)
3.67
164
0.83
0.783
54(3)
88(4)
26(2)
4.24
183
0.81
0.776
53(2)
89(4)
25(2)
4.99
204
0.79
0.767
52(2)
89(3)
24(1)
5.50
216
0.79
0.762
50(2)
92(3)
23(1)
The last three columns of Table I show that the terms predicted to be constant by Eqs. (6,7,8) are indeed constant at the level of experimental accuracy, provided that one uses for U the initial impact speeds. The mean value of A/UT from Eq. (8) is then 51 ± 2 mm, close to the theoretical value of 49.1 mm, whereas using the recoil speed gives values of ≈ 65 mm, which increase systematically with U.
Hertz's equations arise because the elastic strain field is localised to about the depth of the radius of the circle of contact, cf. the diagram in Love.3 However, this must be the case for any solid which is reasonably large compared with the area of impact. For example, for cylinders, Prowse7 found that T(U) follows a power law with an exponent which varies from ≈ -0.14 for long cylinders, to ≈ -0.23 as the length tends to zero, i.e., straddling the Hertz value. Some of his cylinders had ball-ended impact surfaces for which one can calculate the ratio (A/UT) from the data in his paper; it was constant for each cylinder, but decreased with length, falling to 7.1 mm, significantly smaller than the value of 7.7 mm expected from Hertz's theory. The exponents measured in the present work agree with Hertz's theory, but the results for cylinders show that this is not a critical test. Equation (8) is a stronger test because (i) it is independent of the value or behaviour of the elastic coefficients X, (ii) the value of the numerical term is a direct consequence of Hertz's theory for a sphere, and (iii) it involves the magnitude of the impact speed explicitly. The ratio (A/UT) discriminates better between the shapes of the colliding bodies than does the exponent of T(U); moreover, it gives a strong indication that it is the initial speed which should be used in the comparison with theory (cf. Sec. III C 1).
The mean values of A1/2T2 and A5/2/U2 from Table I lead to values of (X1 + X2) equal to 14×10-10 N-1 m2 and 15×10-10 N-1 m2, respectively, and a plot of A vs U0.8 gives a good fit through the origin, despite the restricted range of the data, with a value of 15.2 ± 0.4×10-10 N-1 m2. The value of (X1 + X2) is the sum of terms from the ball and the wood of the mallet, (XJ + XW) say, neither of which is known independently; however, the results discussed in Sec. III B lead to a value of the ratio XW/XJ, and thus to their separate values.
The only comparable work on inelastic collision appears to be due to Tait8, who made experiments on materials with e between 0.3 and 0.8. Tait's ingenious experiments preceded Hertz's theory and do not allow a systematic comparison with it; however, they provide some support for the agreement found here. For example, for a sample of vulcanised India rubber ( e ≈ 0.78), he found a compressive force proportional to z3/2, in agreement with (1), and he used it to calculate an impact time which is in good agreement with Hertz's theory.
B. Coefficient of restitution, e
The results for the Jaques ball striking both steel and wood are shown in Fig. 2. Since the ratio of maximum linear compressions normal to the area of contact of bodies 1 and 2 is given by the Hertz theory as
and since (see below) XJ for the Jaques ball is ≈
4×10-10 N-1 m2 while X for steel9 = 0.043×10-10 N-1 m2, then the ball accounts for 99% of the total compression for the impact on steel, and e(U) on steel is almost entirely due to the intrinsic energy loss of the ball. The values of e(U) shown for impact on wood in Fig. 2 are thus surprising at first sight since they indicate a loss lower than the intrinsic loss of the ball; however, the important variable is not U, but the compression of the colliding bodies, which is related to their elastic coefficients and to U by Eq. (6). The shapes of the curves in Fig. 2 are similar, and in fact by transforming the data to give the relative loss of kinetic energy using K(U)
≡ (1-e2(U)), both sets of data can be expressed by K(U) = K0 + K1U0.4, as shown in Fig. 3, with K0 and K1 equal to 0.198(2) and 0.112(2), respectively, for the intrinsic loss on steel, and to 0.213(5) and 0.077(4) on wood.
Fig. 2. The coefficient of restitution, e(U), for the Jaques ball on steel and on wood.
Fig. 3. Energy loss, K(U) = (1-e(U)2), vs U0.4 for the Jaques ball on steel and on wood.
The expressions for K(U) show that by making a small shift in the value of K0, and by scaling U in the ratio UW/US = 2.5(1), the loss curves on steel and on wood can be superposed exactly. Evidence from the present experiments (not given in detail here) shows that the energy loss in the wooden mallet can account for the small increase in the value of K0, but makes negligible contribution to the value of K1, from which it follows that the ratio UW/US is just the speed ratio which produces the same compression of the ball, h1, on impact with the two surfaces. This is a ratio which can also be calculated from Eq. (6) in terms of the elastic coefficients of the bodies (recalling that A = πRh and that h = h1 + h2), giving
where XW and XJ refer to wood and to the ball, and X for steel has been assumed to be negligible. Using (10) and the measured value of UW/US gives XW/XJ = 2.5, and combining this with (XW + XJ) as found before, gives XJ = 4.3(2)×10-10 N-1 m2 and XW = 10.7(2)×10-10 N-1 m2.
The original aim of this work did not require the equipment used to be well characterised, and no independent value exists for XJ. For the wood, neither the sort used nor its grain alignment is known, but since all woods have the same value of Young's modulus within a factor of 2 (Ref. 9) (about the same factor as arises from accidents of growth), a value for X along the grain of 1×10-10 N-1 m2 is typical, i.e., only one-tenth of the value of XW found here. Wood, however, is extremely anisotropic, with values of X along, across, and tangential to the grain typically in ratios ≈ 1:10:209,10. The effect of elastic anisotropy on the Hertz theory has never been calculated, but the present results show that the higher value of X associated with transverse stresses must be important (cf. the diagram of the stress field given in Love3 and the considerations of elastic stored energy in Leroy5).
C. The Hertz theory and inelastic collision
The results of Sec. III A show good agreement with Hertz's theory of impact, which is unexpected since about 40% of the initial kinetic energy is lost. The theory assumes that mechanical energy is conserved, which is clearly not true, so why do Hertz's equations appear to hold?
1. Quasi-elastic initial compression
A considerable part of the initial kinetic energy does not contribute to the kinetic energy of recoil, but is almost all ultimately dissipated by thermal diffusion; this dissipated energy is not initially distinct from that which is recovered, however, and one may expect that both fractions are identically stored throughout the strain field. If this is correct, then the elastic potential energy function used by Hertz is valid for the initial compression, and the calculated values of A and of T/2 are given correctly using the initial impact speed U, even for inelastic collisions. Of course, the recoil speed is reduced after impact and Hertz's theory shows that the subsequent separation must take longer than the initial compression by an amount which can be calculated from the known values of e(U). However, this systematic increase of T in the present experiments is only 0.018 ms for each of the speeds in Table I, an effect at the limit of uncertainty (but see also Sec. III C 3).
2. Asymmetric mechanical response
The combination of measurements of A(U) and T(U) suggests that the energy loss occurs after the time of maximum compression of the ball, and this is confirmed by the recent experiments of Cross2 on the mechanical hysteresis which gives rise to energy loss. Cross used a piezo-transducer to obtain force-time data for a variety of bouncing balls, and obtained the dynamic force-distance response by numerical integration. His results relate to Hertz's theory in a number of ways, but the important point here is that all his hysteresis curves are asymmetric, as shown schematically in Fig. 4 (cf. his Fig. 2): The compression is at least approximately Hertzian, but the force during recoil is notably depressed, and it is also clear that the ball has not fully recovered its shape at separation. Cross also shows quasistatic force-distance curves for the softer balls, using a 3-min strain cycle, and even at this much slower strain rate, ≈ 10-4 of that on impact, most balls show hysteresis and stress relaxation during unloading, e.g., from the areas of Cross's hysteresis loops one finds that the relative energy loss of the golf ball is ≈ 17% under quasistatic test (corresponding to e = 0.91), and ≈ 27% under impact (i.e., e = 0.86; cf. the value of e = 0.844 at an impact speed of 1.47 m s-1 from Cross's Table I).
Fig. 4. Schematic hysteresis diagram of force versus deformation during quasistatic test, S, and during impact, I.
Cross did not study a croquet ball, but the ball studied here appears to be similar in its behaviour to his golf ball, with a compression stage which is essentially elastic and Hertzian, and an energy loss which occurs mostly during the hysteresis on recoil, and which includes energy carried off by the still partly compressed ball. The energy loss of the ball measured here, K(U) = K0 + K1U0.4, can now be understood as an irreducible part, K0, arising from the area under the quasistatic hysteresis loop, and a speed-dependent part which increases as the impact time decreases and the hysteresis loop expands. Using the measured value of K(U) for the intrinsic loss of the Jaques ball, its value of e falls from 0.90 for very low impact speeds to 0.82 for a speed of 1.47 m s-1, values which are very close to those given above for the golf ball studied by Cross.
3. Residual deformation at separation
The systematic increase of T(U) by 0.018 ms calculated in Sec. III C follows from assuming that the ball recoils at reduced speed, but in accord with Hertz's theory. This implies that the ball has regained a strain-free, spherical shape, and carries off no elastically stored energy: This is one possible model of collision; however, it is not compatible with the mechanical hysteresis curves measured by Cross. The observed residual compression at separation can be modelled by a different assumption, i.e., that the collision is elastic and reversible up to the recoil speed eU, when separation occurs (when the flux of elastic stored energy is too small to produce further acceleration), while the ball carries off the rest of the energy, which is ultimately dissipated. The Hertz equation for conservation of kinetic and elastic stored energy can be solved to obtain the fraction of the maximum compression which is retained at separation, f (= (1-e2)0.4), and also the resulting decrease of the collision time. For the speeds in Table I, f varies from 63.3% to 66.8% when the decrease of the collision times varies from 0.193 to 0.168 ms. The two models above represent extremes of behaviour, and the true correction for inelastic effects must lie between their limits. In fact, the experimental value of f for Cross's golf ball is about 16%, much lower than the 61% which can be calculated from its value of e, and if this value of f is also appropriate for the croquet ball, then the contact times of Table I will all be smaller by ≈
0.04 ms than predicted by Hertz's theory. A systematic deviation of 0.04 ms is at only twice the level of the experimental uncertainty, and cannot be ruled out; indeed there is some evidence for it, since if the values of T observed here are all increased by 0.04 ms to correct for this effect, then the value of the ratio (A/UT) becomes 49 ± 2 mm, in exact agreement with the prediction from Hertz's theory.
IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The object of this work was not to make a test of Hertz's theory of collision, which can be regarded as proven for elastic impact6, but to show that measurements on a croquet ball of contact area, A(U), and contact time, T(U), are well described by his theory, even though about 40% of the kinetic energy is lost on collision.
This result can be understood since the values of A, and T/2, are largely determined bythe compression stage of impact, before appreciable energy loss has occurred, and are thus given correctly by the Hertz theory. The contribution to the total contact time from recoil needs correction, since it is increased by a lower recoil speed, but is decreased by a residual compression of the ball at separation. However, since T ∝ U-0.2 [cf. Eq. (5)], both effects give rise to rather small corrections, and Hertz's equations therefore continue to be a good approximation for inelastic collision even when the energy loss is large. The two effects lie outside Hertz's theory, so that the observed agreement with it is partly fortuitous, but many inelastic materials will have mechanical hysteresis loops similar to that for Cross's golf ball and the croquet ball studied here, so that the present initially unexpected agreement with Hertz's elastic theory should in fact not be uncommon. This remains to be seen.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
These experiments began as undergraduate projects. I am grateful to several students for their enthusiastic interest; in particular, to D. G. McDowall for developing the timer, to him and J. M. Marshall for the contact time results, and to A. Jennings and S. Tanner for the contact area results. I am also grateful to Professor R. G. Chambers for helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper.
REFERENCES
J. F. Bell, "The experimental foundations of solid mechanics," Handbuch der Physik (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1973), Vol. VIa/1, especially pp. 313-331.
An interesting comparison of the (elastic) impact of cylinders and balls is made by D. Auerbach, "Colliding rods: Dynamics and relevance to colliding balls," Am. J. Phys. 62, 522-525 (1994). First citation in article
R. Cross, "The bounce of a ball," Am. J. Phys. 67, 222-227 (1999)
[cf. also his later work on more complicated collisions, "Impact of a ball with a bat or a racket," 67, 692-702 (1999)]. First citation in article
A. E. H. Love, A Treatise on the Mathematical Theory of Elasticity (Dover, New York, 1944), 4th ed., pp. 193-200, 440. First citation in article
L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Course of Theoretical Physics (Pergamon, Oxford, 1959), Vol. 7, pp. 26-31. First citation in article
B. Leroy, "Collision between two balls accompanied by deformation: A qualitative approach to Hertz's theory," Am. J. Phys. 53, 346-349 (1985). First citation in article
References to early work are given by Bell (Ref. 1) and by Love (Ref. 3), but the best confirmation of Hertz's theory known to the author is given by A. E.Kennelly and E. F. Northrup.
"On the duration of electrical contact between impacting spheres," J. Franklin Inst. 172, 23-38 (1911). They were interested in short electrical pulses, not in testing Hertz's theory (which they do not mention), however their results agree well with his predictions for T(U). The best experiments, on identical steel balls in pendulum collision, give -0.205 ± 0.005 for the exponent for speeds between 0.44 and 2.8 m s-1 (cf.-0.2), while the measured values of T agree with those calculated from the elastic ≈ 1%.
Kennelly and Northrup do not consider the possibility of inelastic behaviour, but later work by J. P. Andrews, "Theory of collision of spheres of soft metals," Philos. Mag. 9, 593-610 (1930), develops Hertz's theory to deal with deformation of the surface of the ball due to plastic flow on impact. Andrews' model leads to a decrease of the coefficient of restitution with impact speed, similar to results reported by Raman, but it does not appear to be generally applicable
[cf. J. P. Andrews, "Experiments on impact," Proc. Phys. Soc.London 43, 8-17 (1931)]. First citation in article
W. A. Prowse, "The development of pressure waves during the longitudinal impact of bars," Philos. Mag. 22, 209-239 (1936). First citation in article
P. G. Tait, "On impact," Scientific Papers (Cambridge U.P.,Cambridge, 1900), Vol. 2, pp. 221-279. First citation in article
G. W. C. Kaye and T. H. Laby, Tables of Physical Constants (Longmans, London, 1995), 16th ed., p. 48. First citation in article
R. F. S. Hearmon, "The elastic constants of anisotropic materials," Rev. Mod. Phys. 18, 409-436 (1946). First citation in article
Jake Zwart adds...
I have come across a few papers similar to this work.
In particular the paper at http://glaser.berkeley.edu/glaserdrupal/pdf/jasa%20hertz%20impact.pdf (link no longer works - try this) gives reference to Hunter (1957) which seems to be the approach used in the article. Another reference by Reed (1985) gives a correction to Hunter which may be pertinent to the analysis.
Glaser also gives an interesting method to determine whether the approach of Hunter or Reed is better. The size of the particles are not so important, it is rather whether the assumptions in Hertzian analysis are violated and whether this violations is significant. As far as I can determine, Gugan used the same approach as Hunter, an approach that Reed improves, and Glaser discusses.
Author: D. Gugan
All rights reserved © 2000
Updated 25.iii.25
About, Webmaster
www.oxfordcroquet.com/tech/gugan/index.asp
on www.oxfordcroquet.com
Hits: 69284
Front Page
What's New
How to Play
Equipment
Laws
Refereeing
Rankings
Tournaments
Technical
Lawn Care
Croquet Clubs
Club Management
Health & Safety
Promoting Croquet
History
Contacts & Links
FAQ
Miscellany
Adverts
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/intentional_fouls.pdf
title: Intentional Fouls
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Intentional Fouls”                                                             ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at drdavepoolinfo.com. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     As in all sports and games, sometimes good defense is the best offense. And sometimes that defense
takes the form of fouling on purpose. Some people might think of this as “Dirty Pool,” but it is simply smart
winning strategy. In a recent online video (NV L.108), I cover many different situations where an intentional
foul is the best play. I’ll describe some of the examples from the video here, all of which are from the game of
8-ball, shooting stripes.

     The most common type of intentional foul is where you hit the wrong ball first on purpose to achieve some
benefit. Image 1a shows a simple example. Since I have no reliably way to get a legal hit on the 11, I decide
to tie up the 2 with the 5. This is an intentional foul since I am playing stripes and hit a solid first, so my opponent
will have ball in hand. Image 1b shows the result of the shot. I created a cluster with the 2 and 5, and neither
ball can be pocketed directly. My opponent can attempt a break-out shot with ball in hand, shooting at the 3,
but clusters don’t always break out the way you want; and the 1 is also a problem, so I like my chances.

                                                       a) before

                                                        b) after

                                            Image 1 Creating a cluster

    What would you do in this situation shown in Image 2a? Again, I don’t have a reasonable chance to get a
legal hit on the 11. I decide to send the 8 between the 1 and 11 to take away a possible shot on the 1 and
leave my hanger blocking the corner. For seeming to have no shot in Image 2a, the post-shot layout in Image

Billiards Digest                                         1                                                   March 2026
2b is a very good result. In the video, I show how the situation could play out from there. With ball in hand, my
opponent first decides to replace the 11 hanger with the 2. That seems to be a very effective shot, but I can
just play another intentional foul by hitting the 1 first to dump the 2 and leave the 1 bad. My opponent then
decides to get the 1 out into the open and freeze the cue ball (CB) to the 8. I don’t have any great options on
the 8 from there. As with all shots and situations in this column, see the video for demonstrations.

                                                   a) before

                                                    b) after

                                         Image 2 Blocking a pocket

     What would you do in the situation shown in Image 3a, shooting stripes? Another common type of
intentional foul is hitting an opponent ball first to dump an opponent hanger. Hitting the 3-11 combo into the 5
lets me gain control of the pocket to create an advantage, even though my opponent will have ball in hand on
the next shot. As shown in the video, unfortunately my opponent is smart, deciding to bank the 3 into the 11 to
regain control. That is a good shot for being in a seemingly tough situation.

                                                   a) before

Billiards Digest                                     2                                                 March 2026
                                                   b) after

                                     Image 3 Dump opponent hanger

     Image 4a shows another interesting situation. What would you do here, shooting stripes? If I intentionally
foul by dumping the 1, my opponent can’t use it to break out the 3-5 cluster. About the best my opponent can
do after my shot (see Image 4b) is separate his cluster and try to leave me hooked from both the 9 and 13, as
demonstrated in the video. Regardless, I am still better off than I was before.

                                                  a) before

Billiards Digest                                    3                                                March 2026
                                                        b) after

                                          Image 4 Dump break-out ball

     Image 5a shows a common end-game situation in 8-ball, where intentional fouls come up often. I am
shooting stripes, snookered from the 8 behind the 3. The best play here is an intentional foul, where I leave
the 3 tied up with the 8. If I am not careful, my opponent can keep me in the same situation by continuing to
keep the 3 tied up with the 8, but they have nothing to gain by continuing to do this. I will also just keep the 3
tied up with the 8, continuing to push the 8 toward the corner, where I eventually might get a fairly easy kick
shot off the upper rail for the win. The video demonstrates different approaches to the situation, along with
many options for initial shots and replies.

                                                       a) before

                                                        b) after

                                     Image 5 Common end-game situation

    A good play for my opponent is to use running spin to leave the CB under the 3 with separation between
the 3 and 8 so I can’t tie up the 3 with the 8 again. The leave shown in Image 5b is nearly perfect with the CB
frozen to the 3 at a favorable angle, leaving me with no good options. If I don’t get a hit on the 8, my opponent
has an easy out. The only reasonable option here is a masse kick off the right rail, but it is not easy (see the
video demonstrations).

     Another interesting situation where an intentional foul is the only reasonable option is when a single
remaining stripe is hanging in a pocket but totally surrounded by solids. The video shows all the options both
stripes and solids have in this situation. There is very little that stripes can do gain an advantage in this situation.
One option is to not disturb the balls at all and hope your opponent (shooting solids) decides to do the same
Billiards Digest                                         4                                                   March 2026
thing, resulting in a stalemate, where the rack is replayed from a break shot of a full rack. But as shown in the
video, solids has many better options than this.

     I hope this column and the online video (NV L.108) help you be more aware of intentional-foul opportunities
that can increase your chances for winning games, even when you are in tough situations. Sometimes the best
offense is smart intentional-foul-fueled defense.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV L.108 – Intentional Fouls … An Important Strategic Tool
   normal video

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at drdavepoolinfo.com.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                         5                                                 March 2026
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/is_a_pool_ball_smoother_than_the_earth.pdf
title: Is A Pool Ball Smoother Than The Earth
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Is a Pool Ball Smoother Than the Earth?”                                 ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles can be viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference
numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or
inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD.
Details can be found online at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

    Most of us think of pool balls as very smooth, but how smooth are they? Well, I decided to find an
accurate answer to this question, so I visited the surface metrology laboratory on my university campus.
Fortunately, the Lab has a scanning white light interferometer (SWLI) that enabled me to capture some high-
resolution images of pool ball surfaces under extreme magnification. The SWLI not only captures visual
images of the surface, but it also measures surface height at each pixel in the visual image.

     Diagram 1 shows an image and elevation contour map of a magnified 1 millimeter by 1 millimeter area on
a new and clean Aramith cue ball (CB). Pool balls are usually cast from and coated with a hard plastic
phenolic resin and then polished smooth (see the links in the “ball material and manufacturing” section of my
website FAQ page for more info). The plentiful scratches visible in image “a” are from the polishing portion of
the manufacturing process, and the blemishes and pits are probably slight defects in the cast/coated resin
material. When magnified and imaged, a CB’s surface isn’t as smooth as you might have thought it was, is it?
The elevation contour map shown in “b” displays the relative heights of the small peaks and valleys on the
surface. The reddish colors indicate high features, and the bluish colors represent low features, with yellows
and green in the middle. If you focus on the big scratches in image “a,” you can see the correspondence in
“b.”    On this portion of the CB surface, the measured peak-to-valley range was +0.32 to
-0.54 µm, per the scale on the right side of “b.” A µm is a micron or micrometer, which is a millionth of a
meter or about 40 millionths of an inch! The SWLI can obviously measure very small heights and depths on
the surface.

                                   Diagram 1 New and clean CB surface

Billiards Digest                                                                                     June, 2013
     Diagram 2 shows the image and elevation contour map for an old CB that had been used for about a
year and had not been cleaned recently. Images “a” and “b” are of the ball without any preparation, and
images “c” and “d” are from the same area on the ball, but after cleaning. The surface was cleaned with an
alcohol-base solvent, using a cotton swab to rub and wipe across the area. There appears to be only subtle
differences in the images before and after cleaning; however, some of the features (“dirt”) in image “a” are
obviously missing in image “c”. Notice that the peak-to-valley range is smaller in image “d” (+1.70 to -2.29
µm) compared to that in image “b” (+2.52 to -2.61 µm). Both of these ranges are larger than the range for the
new ball in Diagram 1. This could be a result of the wear resulting with use, but it could also just be a typical
difference from one ball to the next or from one area on the surface to the next.

                     Diagram 2 Used and dirty CB surface, before and after cleaning

    Diagram 3 shows images for an Elephant Practice Ball, which is made from polyester instead of a
phenolic resin. Notice the clearly visible long cracks on the surface. (BTW, the cracks were not visible to the
naked eye.) The cracks might be a result of the manufacturing process (for example, when the outer coating
shrinks due to cooling or drying), but they could also be fractures resulting from use. Regardless, I didn’t see
any features like this in any of the phenolic balls I imaged. The peak-to-valley range on the Elephant Practice
Ball (+2.67 to -3.03 µm) was the largest of all of the measurements made. Image “c” is a three-dimensional
(3D) version of the elevation contour map in “b.” In the 3D image, the cracks are reminiscent of fault lines in
the Earth’s crust, where the red portion on the right is a higher “mountain-like” area lifted above the “plain-like”
green and blue portion on the left.

                                       Diagram 3 Elephant Practice Ball

Billiards Digest                                                                                          June, 2013
    Diagram 4 shows the image of an Aramith CB with a scuff mark that was probably caused by a miscue.
The abrasions on the surface clearly visible in the bottom of image “a,” are evidence of the scuff mark that
was visible to the naked eye. Also shown are elevation contour maps with line plots through two different
cross sections, one through the non-scuffed and relatively smooth area (images “b” and “d”), and one through
the middle of the scuff (images “c” and “e”). Obviously, the scuffed area has a much larger peak-to-valley
range, as would be expected. Also note that the peak-to-valley range for the scuffed ball (+1.08 to -1.41 µm)
is much larger than the baseline test shown in Diagram 1 (+0.32 to -0.54 µm).

                                      Diagram 4 CB with a scuff mark

     So, based on the data, just how smooth is a CB? And how does this smoothness compare to the surface
of the Earth? The highest point on earth is Mount Everest, which is about 29,000 feet above sea level; and
the lowest point (in the earth’s crust) is Mariana’s Trench, which is about 36,000 feet below sea level. The
larger number (36,000 feet) corresponds to about 1700 parts per million (0.17%) as compared to the average
radius of the Earth (about 4000 miles). The largest peak or trench for all of the balls I tested was about 3
microns (for the Elephant Practice Ball). This corresponds to about 100 parts per million (0.01%) as
compared to the radius of a pool ball (1 1/8 inch). Therefore, it would appear that a pool ball (even the worst
one tested) is much smoother than the Earth would be if it were shrunk down to the size of a pool ball.
However, the Earth is actually much smoother than the numbers imply over most of its surface. A 1x1
millimeter area on a pool ball (the physical size of the images) corresponds to about a 140x140 mile area on
the Earth. Such a small area certainly doesn’t include things like Mount Everest and Mariana’s Trench in the
same locale. And in many places, especially places like Louisiana, where I grew up, the Earth’s surface is
very flat and smooth over this area size. Therefore, much of the Earth’s surface would be much smoother
than a pool ball if it were shrunk down to the same size.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     June, 2013
     Regardless, the Earth would make a terrible pool ball. Not only would it have a few extreme peaks and
trenches still larger than typical pool-ball surface features, the shrunken-Earth ball would also be terribly non
round compared to high-quality pool balls. The diameter at the equator (which is larger due to the rotation of
the Earth) is 27 miles greater than the diameter at the poles. That would correspond to a pool ball diameter
variance of about 7 thousandths of an inch. Typical new and high-quality pool balls are much rounder than
that, usually within 1 thousandth of an inch.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   I want to thank Jack Clark of Surface Analytics, who runs the surface metrology Lab at my university.
          The equipment we used was a Zygo New View 7300 Scanning White Light Interferometer (SWLI).
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards,”
and co-author of the DVD Series: “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS)” and “Video
Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).”

Billiards Digest                                                                                       June, 2013
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/is_elbow_drop_bad.pdf
title: Is Elbow Drop Bad
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, banks_kicks_rails
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Is Elbow Drop Bad?”                                                       ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     Recently, I posted online video NV J.135 that discusses and demonstrates different types of pool strokes,
looking at both advantages and disadvantages of elbow drop caused by shoulder and upper-arm motion.
Advice and techniques are also offered for those hoping to eliminate elbow drop from their stroke. In this
article, I summarize some of the useful info from the video.

     As shown in the video, many top players flex their shoulder and drop their elbow during their stroke.
Usually, the drop occurs only after the hit, during the follow through, after the cue ball (CB) is long gone.
Regardless of what mechanics a pro uses, even if the technique is contrary to what most instructors
recommend, pros spend countless hours mastering their technique, and they can deliver the cue accurately
and consistently, regardless of their mechanics choices. However, for most people, including many pros,
keeping the shoulder and elbow still during the stroke will produce better and more consistent results. Many
amateurs who move their shoulder and drop their elbow have trouble with timing and consistency, leading to
tip-contact point and stroke inaccuracy. If this might be the case for you, you are reading the right article.

Stroke Types

     As demonstrated in the video, there are several common ways to stroke a pool cue. The generally
recommended stroke type is called a “pendulum stroke,” where the shoulder and elbow remain still during the
entire stroke. An alternative “piston stroke,” where the cue moves in a straight line, requires coordinated
shoulder and up-and-down elbow motion. A common stroke variation is called a “J” stroke, where the
backstroke and forward stroke into the CB are pendulum style, to help ensure tip contact point accuracy, and
the follow through is more piston style with elbow “collapse” or “drop.” The grip-hand trajectory is shaped like
a flattened horizontal letter “J” (see Image 1).

                                             Image 1 “J” stroke

Billiards Digest                                                                                    January, 2022
Advantages and Disadvantages

    If you go to the elbow-drop resource page linked in the video description, you can find lists of both
advantages and disadvantages. The primary advantage is that elbow drop can allow you to generate more
power with less effort and strain, and it is more natural. A primary disadvantage of dropping your elbow
during the stroke into the ball is you will likely not hit the CB where you expect consistently. One big problem
with elbow drop for many people is that other bad things sometimes come with it like wrist turn and sideways
“chicken wing” motion (see Image 2), both of which can throw the cue off line.

                                          Image 2 “Chicken wing”

How to Eliminate

     If you want to stop moving your elbow, but you are having trouble doing so, the advice in this section
might help. First, you can have a friend lightly place fingers around your elbow while you stroke back and
forth (see Image 3). If you move or drop your elbow, it will be clear to both your and your friend. Your friend
can also hold your upper arm and shoulder while you stroke to remind you that these should remain still to
keep the elbow from dropping. Another clue of a dropping elbow early is banging the cue into the rail.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    January, 2022
                                    Image 3 Friendly elbow finger touch

    Some additional techniques you can do on your own to help eliminate elbow drop are demonstrated in
online video NV J.135. Get down into your stance, addressing the CB, and shift your bridge hand and cue to
the side, where you can stroke past the CB. Then take “air strokes,” going back slowly and accelerating
smoothly forward past the CB to simulate the stroking motion. Now, keeping everything still, turn just your
head back so you can see your forearm (see Image 4). Continue the “air strokes” to observe if your shoulder
and upper arm are moving, causing your elbow to drop. If so, try to keep this from happening, really focusing
on the shoulder and upper arm. This is good practice because once you find the right motion, you will be both
seeing and feeling a still-elbow stroke, and this will help build brain/muscle memory.

                                         Image 4 “Look back” trick

    It might also help to “lock and load” the shoulder while standing. As I demonstrate in the video, just lift
and tuck back your shoulder as part of your pre-shot routine, and really focus on keeping it in this position
during the stroke. Another benefit of the shoulder “lock and load” is if you tend to have a “chicken wing” setup
with the elbow out away from your body, the shoulder tuck can help you get your elbow in with the forearm
more vertical.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    January, 2022
     Some people have commented on my stance in previous videos concerning my shoulder alignment. My
cue and forearm are in the plane of the shot, but my shoulder is well outside the plane (see Image 5).
Traditional pool instruction suggests the shoulder should also be in the shot plane. For some people,
especially those with an open stance, this can be difficult. You might need to pull your shoulder up and back
and/or add body or neck twist and turn, which might not be very comfortable (or even possible for you). But
this might not be necessary. As demonstrated in the video, if the elbow and forearm are in the shot plane,
you can still have a very straight and consistent stroke. If your forearm is vertical and your vision center is
properly aligned, and if you can keep your elbow still during the stroke into the CB with straight cue motion, it
doesn’t really matter where the upper arm and shoulder are.

                                   Image 5 Shoulder out of the shot plane

      If you are still having trouble keeping your elbow still, it can help to focus on different things. While doing
“air strokes,” first try to focus on keeping your shoulder locked. If your shoulder joint does not move, the
elbow cannot drop. Keeping the shoulder joint still is a good thing because the shoulder can move in many
ways that can throw the cue off line. If that doesn’t work, try to instead focus on keeping your upper arm
perfectly still, again while taking “air strokes.” If that doesn’t work, instead try to focus on keeping your elbow
still, imagining your elbow joint as a hinge, with the hinge pin fixed in space. And if that doesn’t work, instead
try to focus on the grip hand coming up to the chest. With a pendulum stroke, the hand should come up
during the follow through. Try to find out which one of these focusing targets works best for you. After
enough practice with this, eventually you won’t need to focus on the stroke mechanics anymore. The still-
elbow pendulum stroke will become your “new natural” motion.

    If none of this works, you can do “air strokes” up against a wall (see Image 6). If you feel and hear lots of
rubbing, it is because you are moving your shoulder and upper arm, causing your elbow to drop. Once you
get your elbow to stop dropping, you will not hear and feel the rubbing.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        January, 2022
                                     Image 6 “Air strokes” against a wall

    So … should you drop your elbow during your pool stroke? Well, if you can drop it with perfect and
consistent timing, and if you drop it straight down with no “chicken wing” motion, and if you have been
effective dropping your elbow for many years, then there is no reason to change. However, if you have
trouble with tip contact point accuracy or if you have trouble with stroke straightness and consistency, keeping
your shoulder, upper arm, and elbow still can help you be more effective, and it might help you reach your
potential more quickly.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV J.135 – Why and How to Prevent ELBOW DROP During Your Stroke
normal video

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
           familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
           please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    January, 2022
Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                          January, 2022
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/is_ld_better.pdf
title: Is Ld Better
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Is LD Better?”                                                           ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     In a recent YouTube video (NV L.11), I demonstrated a simple procedure anybody can use to easily and
accurately test and compare any pool cue shafts for cue ball (CB) deflection (see Image 1). I also tested a
collection of shafts, including large CB deflection solid maple and low CB deflection carbon fiber. The results
revealed some interesting facts and trends. But is a low-deflection or LD shaft better? I answer this question
in a follow-up video (NV L.12), which I summarize here.

                                           Image 1 CB deflection

     When using sidespin with an LD shaft, the amount the CB squirts offline is less than with average pool
cues. In other words, with an LD shaft, the CB heads straighter when using sidespin. On the “LD shaft”
resource page at billiards.colostate.edu, I document everything known about LD shafts. Below, I summarize
the important advantages and disadvantages, which are backed up by supporting links on the resource page.

    So, what advantages do LD shafts offer? First, with less CB deflection, you are less likely to miss short
shots with small amounts of spin into big pockets, even if you don’t compensate your aim for CB deflection. In
the video, I use the shot in Image 2 for many demonstrations. The goal is to pocket the 13 and get shape for
the 8 anywhere above the indicated line. For example, as I demonstrate in the video, if you do a parallel shift
relative to an accurate center-ball line of aim using an LD shaft, you can easily make the shot with no
compensation for CB deflection. However, with a non-LD solid maple shaft, you will miss the shot with the
same aim, speed, and spin. As I demonstrate in the video, with more spin, I still make the shot with the LD
shaft and parallel aim, but only because the pocket is large. With the non-LD shaft, I miss the shot badly with
the uncompensated parallel-shift aim. But even with an LD shaft, with enough spin and shot speed, this shot
is miss-able. But if you know how to compensate your aim for CB deflection for shots of different amounts of
spin, speed, and distance, you can be accurate with any cue.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    August, 2023
                                                 Image 2 Example shot

       Two advantages of an LD shaft, whether or not you are good at compensating your aim for CB deflection,
are:

          •        less aim compensation is required.

          •        with less compensation, there will be less chance for error in your judgement.

For more information, see the “LD shaft” resource page at billiards.colostate.edu.

    In online video NV L.12, I demonstrate how different lines of aim are required for different amounts of speed
and spin, using both outside and inside english. I do this for the shot in Image 2 by showing many ways to
pocket the 13 and get shape on the 8. The spin and CB path you choose might depend on personal preference
or other balls that might be on the table, blocking some path options. Watch the video to see how different the
lines of aims are over the wide range of shot types. Anybody who thinks you don’t need to adjust your aim
when using sidespin, even with one of the lowest CB deflection cues on the market, is delusional. And with a
non-LD shaft, even more aim correction is required.

    As I have presented in previous columns, a simple approach for certain shafts and shots is called back-
hand english or BHE (see Image 3). We know that if you aim straight with left spin, the CB squirts to the right
(see Image 3a). But with the correct bridge length, if you aim center ball and then pivot the cue to apply the
amount of spin you want (see Image 3b), the pivot aim correction will cancel squirt, making the CB go in the
desired direction (see Image 3c). If your cue has the correct amount of CB deflection for your chosen bridge
length, you can use BHE to find the correct lines of aim for shots of certain speeds and distances.

    In online video NV L.12, I show an example where, if using a long bridge length with my Predator Revo, a
BHE pivot gives me an accurate line of aim. Using a non-LD shaft for the same shot, a shorter bridge length is
required to be accurate with the BHE pivot. For a power break, it is advantageous to have a break cue with a
natural pivot length matched to your preferred break bridge length. That way, as illustrated in Image 4, with an
accurate center-ball aim, you will get a square hit even if your stroke is crooked. See the “natural pivot length”
resource page at billiards.colostate.edu for more information and demonstrations for how to find the natural
pivot length of a shaft.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      August, 2023
                                      Image 3 Backhand english (BHE)

                                      Image 4 Backhand english (BHE)

     The problem with attempting to use BHE on every shot with your playing cue is: It won’t work over a wide
range of shot speeds or distances. Online video NV L.12 demonstrates a good way to experience and learn
about this effect. Place a donut in the center of the pocket opening, and then try to shoot the CB into the center
of the pocket with maximum spin using BHE for shots of different distances and speeds. As demonstrated in
the video, you can get BHE to work for all shots if you use different bridge lengths based on shot distance and
speed. However, judging the different bridge lengths required is difficult. And it is not a good practice to use a
Billiards Digest                                                                                      August, 2023
different bridge length on every shot anyway. And sometimes we need a shorter or longer length to clear an
obstacle ball or reach a shot.

    A much better approach to aiming is the System for Aiming with Sidespin (SAWS). SAWS allows you to
use a comfortable and consistent bridge length, and it provides the correct line of aim for shots of any speed
and distance. As documented and demonstrated on the “SAWS” resource page at billiards.colostate.edu,
SAWS uses combinations of BHE and front-hand english or FHE to give you the correct line of aim. See the
“back and front hand english” resource page if you want to learn more about FHE, and see the SAWS
resource page to learn how to aim effectively over a wide range of sidespin shots.

     So is an LD shaft better? The answer is: It depends on the person. In general, an LD shaft does offer
slight advantages, per the info on the “LD shaft” resource page at billiards.colostate.edu. But an LD shaft
might not be the best choice for everybody. If you are accustomed to compensating your aim when using
sidespin with a non-LD shaft, it might be difficult to adjust to an LD shaft. However, a good player can play well
with any cue if they spend time to learn how CB deflection varies with the amount and type of spin and shot
speed and distance, especially if using SAWS. As mentioned earlier, it does help to use a break cue with a
natural pivot length matched to your preferred break bridge length. Again, check out all the mentioned online
resource pages for more information and help.

      Enjoy the resources, and good luck with your game from Dr. Dave!

                   NV L.11 – CUE TESTING for Cue Ball Deflection, And PREDATOR REVO Carbon Fiber Shaft
                       SIZE EFFECTS
   normal video
                   NV L.12 – Is a Cue with Less Squirt or Cue Ball Deflection Better?

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          August, 2023
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/jared_s_ride_isn_t_fly_but_the_steering_s_perfect.pdf
title: Jared S Ride Isn T Fly But The Steering S Perfect
topics: uncategorized
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
[NO_EXTRACTED_TEXT]
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/jump_shots_made_simple.pdf
title: Jump Shots Made Simple
topics: technical_proofs, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Jump Shots Made Simple”                                                       ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     The jump shot is a very important weapon in the arsenal of a competitive pool player. Having effective
jump shot technique can get you out of all sorts of trouble and help you win games. In two recent YouTube
videos (NV J.110 and NV L.15), I cover everything you need to know to be an effective jumper. I summarize
the important points below.

     A jump shot is much easier with a jump cue, which has a hard phenolic tip and is shorter, stiffer, and lighter
than a regular playing cue. If you think you have never executed a jump shot before, you are probably wrong
because the CB hops anytime you hit it above center or when the back of the cue is elevated to reach over the
rails or obstructing balls.

    As shown in Image 1, a 45˚ elevation angle and center-ball hit works best for a typical jump shots. If you
have never hit a jump shot like this before, the first thing you need to know is you cannot use your normal stance
position. If you do, when you try to elevate, you will be leaning forward too much and it will be very difficult to
elevate the cue enough, especially if you are not very tall. Instead, as demonstrated in the videos, move
everything forward, including the grip hand on the cue, as you elevate. It is helpful if you can keep your arm in
the vertical plane of the shot as with a standard underhand stroke. During the stroke, you should use as little
effort as possible and keep your head, body, shoulder, and upper arm as still as possible. The jump is a finesse
shot, not a power shot, where you keep your grip and wrist relaxed and using a quick throwing motion. Don’t
be afraid to accelerate into the CB, as if you are trying to throw the cue into the table.

                                     Image 1 Standard underhand stroke

    If you are not very tall and it is difficult keeping your stroking arm in the vertical plane, especially at higher
cue elevations, an alternative technique is to rotate your arm out to the side as shown in Image 2. This sidearm
technique is common among the pros since many of them are not very tall and since the sidearm stance is
more relaxed, even at very high cue elevations. The sidearm stance is more open, with the feet, body, and
head closer to the CB. One downside of a sidearm stroke is your neck needs to twist more to face the shot,

Billiards Digest                                                                                         October, 2023
which can cause neck strain and discomfort. Another downside for some people, especially those with weak
shoulders, is it might be difficult to hold the arm in that position while generating the type of stroke needed.
With the sidearm stroke, it is particularly important to keep your shoulder and elbow still. Any motion in the
upper arm will result in terrible tip position and cue alignment accuracy and consistency. However, if you keep
your shoulder and elbow relatively still, you can be effective, especially after dedicated practice.

                                           Image 2 Sidearm stroke

     In general, the regular under-hand and sidearm jump strokes are more accurate, but some people find the
over-hand “dart stroke” shown in Image 3 easier to learn. It is also sometimes a better choice, especially when
you need to reach for a shot or when you need a highly elevated cue to jump higher or land sooner. The shot
in Image 3 is a good example, where because I need to reach out onto the table and where a quick jump and
landing are required, the regular stroke can be awkward. If you have a 3-piece jump cue, the “dart stroke” will
be easier if you remove the 3rd piece. The term “dart stroke” is used because the grip and stroking motion are
very similar to how you hold and throw a dart. The grip consists of your middle finger under the cue, and your
thumb and index finger on the sides of the cue. It is best to have all three fingers as close together as possible
on the cue. That makes it easy to keep the cue straight during the throwing motion.

     As with the regular jump stroke, the dart stroke is a finesse throwing motion with a light grip and wrist. You
don’t want to move your whole arm. Instead, plant your elbow against your body and use mostly the wrist with
just a little forearm motion. Also, you don’t want your body too close to the shot. This puts your arm in an
awkward and constrained position. Instead, get your body and feet as far back as possible with the grip and
cue as far forward in front of you as possible (with the grip just behind the cue’s balance point). This makes
the dart stroke more natural, just as with throwing a dart.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      October, 2023
                                            Image 3 Dart stroke

    Diagrams 1 and 2 illustrate the effects of cue speed and cue elevation. With more cue elevation, the CB
gains height quicker and lands sooner. With more shot speed, the CB jumps longer and higher. When jumping
a long distance, you need to be careful to land the CB soon enough. If you don’t, the CB or OB can hop off the
table, which is a foul, giving your opponent ball in hand.

                                     Diagram 1 Cue elevation effects

Billiards Digest                                                                                  October, 2023
                                              Diagram 2 Speed effects

    Online videos NV J.110 and NV L.15 offer lots of useful practice advice to develop and improve your jump
shot technique, so be sure to check them out, especially if you have not successfully executed jump shots
before. Give all three stroke types a try and put in enough practice to determine which might be more
comfortable, accurate, and consistent for you in different situations. Obviously, you need to choose the
techniques that work best for you as an individual, regardless of what most pros might do. What pros do isn’t
always the best approach for all individuals. Any of the 3 stroke types can be mastered with enough practice;
although, as discussed and demonstrated in the videos, each has advantages and disadvantages in different
situations. But the sidearm stroke is the most versatile, working well over a wide range of cue elevations and
reaches. Just remember: Whichever stroke type you use, be sure to stay relaxed and keep your shoulder and
elbow as still as possible during the stroke.

      Good luck with your game from Dr. Dave!

                   NV J.110 – JUMP SHOT in Pool … Everything You Need to Know
   normal video
                   NV L.15 – JUMP SHOT Stance, Bridge, and Stroke Variations Useful to Know

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          October, 2023
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/jump_stop_draw_follow.pdf
title: Jump Stop Draw Follow
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Jump Stun/Draw/Follow”                                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

    Recently, I created an online video with Jeremiah Gage (author of “Bullseye Billiards”) covering how to
shoot slow motion video of pool shots with a smart phone. The video also uses this technique to look at how
to get stop, draw, and follow with jump shots at various distances and cue elevations. If you haven’t seen the
video yet, you might want to check it out before reading further. It is video NV F.3 at billiards.colostate.edu.

     Diagram 1 shows an example shot from the video. This is a “baby jump” shot, where we only need to
clear a gap between two balls (the 2 and 5). In other words, we need to jump over only the edges of the
obstacle balls. With a baby jump, you can use your normal playing cue, and you can create stop, draw, and
follow just like you normally do. You just need to use modest cue elevation and enough speed to get the
jump height required. The shot in the diagram is from a game of 8-ball shooting stripes. We need a stop shot
to get position on the 8-ball for the win. To get stun at the object ball (OB), you need to hit the cue ball (CB)
slightly below center. If you don’t, the CB will pick up some topspin from the 1st bounce and any subsequent
bounces on the way to the OB. In the slow-motion clips in NV F.3, you can clearly see how easy it is to get
enough jump height with modest cue elevation and firm speed. You can also see how backspin on the CB
wears off when the CB lands and bounces before hitting the OB.

                                      Diagram 1 Baby jump stop shot

     In NV F.3, we demonstrate how to get stop, draw, and follow for several different shots requiring a full
range of cue elevations. It is easy to get follow with a jump shot since the CB naturally picks up topspin every
time it bounces while moving forward, including the first bounce off the tip. With the shot in Diagram 1, with a
slightly above-center hit instead, the CB can follow forward a significant amount. Even a hit slightly below-
center hit can easily create follow. As shown in the slow-motion clip in the video, a hit slightly below-center
creates near stun after the first bounce off the tip, and the 2nd and 3rd bounces add topspin that results in
follow.

    Diagram 2 shows a shot from NV F.3 where draw is required, with a jump over an entire ball. These
types of shots are difficult with a normal playing cue. We used a phenolic-tip jump cue in the video. With

Billiards Digest                                                                                  September, 2015
harder bounces due to the higher jump, the CB will tend to pick up extra topspin with each table impact, so we
need to hit below center to get stun at the OB. To get draw, you need a good hit well below center, and you
can’t let the CB bounce too many times before reaching the OB; otherwise, the backspin will be lost and could
eventually convert to topspin. For follow, a hit close to or slightly below center is appropriate. Remember, the
CB picks up topspin on the first and any subsequent bounces. NV F.3 demonstrates all of these shots,
including the draw shot illustrated in Diagram 2.

                                    Diagram 2 Full-ball jump draw shot

     Diagram 3 illustrates a jump shot requiring higher cue elevation, where you need to jump higher and
sooner to get over an obstacle ball and land well before getting to the OB. At high cue elevations, it can be
easier to use an overhand dart grip and stroke. See the “jump shot technique” resource page in the FAQ
section at billiards.colostate.edu for more information and demonstrations concerning this technique. At
higher cue elevations, the tip contact point must be farther below center than you might expect to get stun at
the OB. Almost all of the backspin is lost during the first bounce into the table off the tip. With a draw shot,
you need a below-center hit and you can’t let the CB bounce more than once on the way to the OB, allowing
the backspin to stay on the CB. To get the most draw, it is best to hit the OB on the fly with no bounces. For
the shot in Diagram 3, slight follow is required to get a shot at the 8 next. To get follow on a short, high jump
like this, you need high cue elevation to clear the ball an enable the CB to develop topspin on the 1st and
subsequent bounces. If you attempt to hit the CB above center at such a high cue elevation, you will jam the
CB into the table and it won’t jump. A below-center hit is shown in the diagram; but remember, the CB will
pick up topspin during the first and subsequent bounces and follow forward. Again, if you haven’t seen this
and the other shots in NV F.3 yet, check them out next time you’re online.

Billiards Digest                                                                                  September, 2015
                                      Diagram 3 Short, high jump with follow

     Jeremiah and I hope you enjoy our video. For much more information and demonstrations related to
jump shot technique and examples, see the “jump shot” resource page in the FAQ section at
billiards.colostate.edu.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV F.3 – Pool stun/draw/follow jump shots at various cue elevations, with smartphone slo-mo
normal video

PS: I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the
online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-
author of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice
(VEPP),” “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD
series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   September, 2015
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/jumping_back_drawing_more_conclusions_with_the_help_of_video.pdf
title: Jumping Back Drawing More Conclusions With The Help Of Video
topics: cue_ball_motion_and_spin
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
[NO_EXTRACTED_TEXT]
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/just_how_big_are_the_pockets_anyway_part_i.pdf
title: Just How Big are the Pockets, Anyway? - Part I
topics: technical_proofs, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                        ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Just How Big are the Pockets, Anyway? – Part I”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV 3.12) help you locate the resources on the
website.

    Did you know that
        •   the side pocket is typically larger than the corner pocket?
        •   at slow speeds and certain angles, the corner pocket effective target size is larger
            than that for a side pocket?
        •   the part of the pocket you aim at can greatly improve your likelihood of pocketing a
            shot, especially at high speed?

Also, did you ever wonder
        •   why the ball sometimes rattles out of the corner pocket when you think you hit the
            shot well?
        •   which pocket is better to target (side vs. corner pocket) when you have a option?

Like many good players, maybe you know about all of these issues already because you have
built solid intuition from many years of practice and experience (i.e., lots of mistakes). Well, for a
geeky engineer like myself, it wasn’t good enough to just have an intuitive feel (which I never
totally trust). I wanted to know exactly how important these effects are. I also wanted to
understand their root causes. In this and my next two articles, I will share the results of some
analyses I have done and discuss important principles that might help give you clearer insight into
some of these effects.

    Before I begin, I want to make it clear that all pool tables are not created equal. Pocket size
and shape can vary significantly with table size and manufacturer. Also, pockets can be
shimmed (decreasing their size) to create more challenging conditions. Coin-operated tables can
often be the most out of specification. Often the pocket sizes and shape (e.g., the angle of the
pocket walls and how far the pocket opening protrudes onto the playing surface) make it easier to
pocket balls. I like to refer to pockets like these as “huge gaping holes.” If you think about it, it
behooves bar owners to have “generous” pockets on their coin-operated tables. If patrons make
shots more easily, they will deposit quarters more frequently, be happier (and drink more “shots”),
and want to come back for more. Anyway, for all of my analyses and observations, I assumed
the standard and average geometry specifications prescribed by the Billiard Congress of America
(BCA) in their Billiards: The Official Rules and Records Book (see the TPs referenced below for
specific values).

    I will start this series of articles off with some important background information. Diagrams 1
through 4 illustrate the basic terminology important for understanding shot difficulty. Important
factors are the distance between the object ball and the pocket (see Principle 7) and the angle of
the object ball path from the pocket centerline. As illustrated in Diagram 1, when the distance to
the pocket is smaller there is a much larger margin of error, which is a measure of how much
the object ball angle can vary from the target center and still enter the pocket. The angle to the
pocket, as shown in Diagram 2, is measured from the pocket centerline (straight-in) direction.
Generally, as this angle gets larger, a shot becomes more difficult because the effective size of
the pocket gets smaller at larger angles. Diagram 2 also shows how the angle-to-pocket error is
measured to define the margin of error.

                      large                               small
                     margin of                           margin of
                      error                               error

          Diagram 1 Margin of error of object ball angle based on distance to the pocket

                                                                   pocket
                                      error in angle              centerline
                                      to the pocket

                                                                        angle to
                                                                       the pocket
                          angle to
                         the pocket

                                                                    target
                   pocket        target                              line
                  centerline      line

                    Diagram 2 Angle to the pocket and error in angle to the pocket

Principle 7 Closer to the pocket is better

The margin of error decreases dramatically as the distance to the pocket increases (see
Diagram 1).

•     See TP 3.4 for the detailed analysis.

                     TP 3.4 – Margin of error based on distance
technical proof
    Diagram 3 illustrates two extreme object ball target positions that result in pocketing the ball
in a side pocket for a given angle to the pocket. These positions define the effective target size
and target center of the pocket. The target size is the distance between the two extreme target
position object ball paths. The target center is the imaginary line between the two extreme
position target lines. The offset is the distance between the target center and the imaginary line
through the pocket center. For a straight-in shot, where the angle to the pocket is 0º, the offset
would be zero and the effective target center is the same as the pocket center.

                                                                       pocket
                                                                       center

            extreme left                                                   extreme right
          position resulting                                             position resulting
       in pocketing of the ball                                       in pocketing of the ball
            at this angle                                                  at this angle
                                  offset

                                     target
                                     center                 target
                                                             size
                                                 angle to
                                                  pocket

                 Diagram 3 Effective target size and center for a side pocket

    There are several differences between the side and corner pockets. As described in
Principle 8, the most important difference is that the side pockets are bigger! However, with the
corner pockets the object ball can deflect off the near rail and still enter the pocket. This
increases the effective target size for the corner pocket at some angles, especially at slower
speeds (see Diagram 4 and Principle 9).
                   extreme left
                 position resulting
              in pocketing of the ball
                   at this angle           target
                                           center

                                              angle to
                                               pocket      target
                                                            size

                                                       extreme right
                                                     position resulting
                                                  in pocketing of the ball
                                                       at this angle

                Diagram 4 Effective target size and center for a corner pocket

Principle 8 The side pockets are bigger

The side pockets are bigger than the corner pockets.

•   The size of a side pocket opening (approximately 5 1/2 inches), from point to point across the
    mouth of the pocket, is larger than that for a corner pocket (approximately 5 inches).
•   The effective target size can be bigger for corner pockets for balls hit softly at shallow angles
    to the rail (see Principle 9).
•   For straight-in shots that must be hit hard, the side pockets are “bigger.”

Principle 9 The corner pocket is sometimes “bigger” than the side pocket

The effective target size of the corner pocket for a slow hit is larger for shots adjacent to
the rail than for straight-in shots.

•   When the ball is hit harder, the ball is more prone to rattle out, especially if the near rail is
    glanced first (see Principle 11).

    When shooting at a side pocket, care must be taken to avoid hitting the near point (see
Principle 10 and NV 3.12). As illustrated in Diagrams 5 and 6, this is particularly important for a
higher speed shot. The reason why the near point must be avoided at high speed is because
contact with the point imparts significant sidespin to the ball, which causes the ball to deflect out
of the pocket (see HSV 3.3). The sidespin is illustrated by the curved arrow in Diagrams 5 and
6a. In this case, the point imparts left (clockwise) spin on the ball.

Principle 10 With a side pocket, avoid hitting the near point

When aiming at a side pocket from an angle, adjust your aim away from the near point (see
Diagram 5 and Diagram 6).

•   The reason for this principle is that the point contact causes rail-induced spin that causes the
    ball to rattle out of the pocket (see HSV 3.3).
•   As illustrated in Diagram 3, the target center is to the left of the pocket center, away from the
    near point.
•   This advice is most important at higher speeds, but it should also be heeded at lower speeds.

                             fast
                             medium
                             slow

                         NOT OK

        if the ball speed is too fast,
      the sidespin causes the ball to
            rattle out of the pocket                                         the object ball
                                                                           hits the near point
                             fast
                             medium
                             slow        sidespin imparted
                                         by the near point
                            OK

                        Diagram 5 Side-pocket near-point speed effect
       the sidespin
     imparted by the                                                             OK
    near point causes
     the ball to rattle                                            by avoiding the
    out of the pocket              NOT OK                        near point, the ball       fast
                                         fast                     can be pocketed,          medium
                                         medium                  even at high speed         slow
                                         slow

                          a) hitting the near point first        b) hitting the far pocket wall first

                     Diagram 6 Avoiding side pocket near point for fast shots

                   NV 3.12 – Side-pocket near-point effects
normal video

                   HSV 3.3 – Side pocket miss due to near point deflection
                   HSV 3.4 – Side pocket miss off far pocket wall
high-speed video   HSV 3.5 – Side pocket near miss due to wall rattle
                   HSV 3.6 – Side pocket rattle out

    When shooting at a corner pocket, care must be taken to avoid hitting the near rail or point
(see Principle 11). As illustrated in Diagrams 7 and 8, this is particularly important for a higher
speed shot. As with the side-pocket near-point effect described above, the rail imparts significant
sidespin to the ball at higher speeds, which causes the ball to rattle out of the pocket (see HSV
3.8).
Principle 11 Corner pocket rattle

When shooting fast at a corner pocket at shallow angles to the rail, avoid hitting the near
rail or point of the pocket (see Diagram 8); otherwise, the ball will rattle out (see NV 3.13,
NV 3.14, and HSV 3.8).

•   The rattle-out is due to rail-induced spin.
•   Rattle is of little or no concern when the ball is hit softly (see Diagram 7). For soft shots, the
    effective pocket size is large because you can contact the rail far in front of the pocket (see
    NV 3.15).

                             fast
                             medium
                             slow

                         NOT OK                      sidespin
                                                     imparted
                if the ball speed is too fast,         by the
              the sidespin causes the ball to         near rail
                    rattle out of the pocket

                             fast
                             medium
                             slow

                            OK
                                          the object ball
                                         hits the near rail

                        Diagram 7 Corner-pocket near-rail speed effect
                                              the sidespin
                                           imparted by the
                                           near rail causes
                                            the ball to rattle
                                           out of the pocket

                                                   fast
                                                   medium
                                                   slow               OK

     NOT OK
                                             by avoiding the
                                            near rail, the ball
                                            can be pocketed,
                                           even at high speed

      a) hitting the near rail first                              b) hitting the far pocket wall first

                Diagram 8 Avoiding the corner-pocket near rail for fast shots

     Diagram 9 illustrates a shot where knowledge of the corner-pocket near-rail speed effect
(Diagram 7) can be used to your advantage. To an inexperienced player, it might appear
hopeless to pocket the 1-ball in the corner pocket because the obstacle 11-ball blocks the direct
path to the pocket. However, by deflecting off the near rail with slow enough speed, the ball can
be pocketed (see NV 3.15). If the speed were too high, the rail would impart significant sidespin
to the ball, causing it to rattle out of the pocket (see Principle 11).

                                                the ball deflects off the
                                              near rail and into the pocket

                                                                  1
                                                            1            1
                                                    1       11

                                  fast
                                  medium
                                  slow

                                                    an obstacle ball
                                                    blocks the direct
                                                   path to the pocket

         Diagram 9 Example corner pocket shot using slow speed off the near rail
                      NV 3.13 – Corner-pocket near-rail effects
                      NV 3.14 – Near rail rattle
normal video          NV 3.15 – Large target size for shallow angle rail shots

                      HSV 3.7 – Corner pocket, in off near point
high-speed video      HSV 3.8 – Corner pocket miss due to near rail deflection

     In next month’s article, I will show a collection of plots (generated from technical analyses)
that will summarize all of the principles and effects concerning pocket target information. The
graphs will help us derive even more insight. I will also show how you can use some of this
information in your game.

Good luck with your game, and practice hard,
Dr. Dave

PS:
               •   If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can
                   access them online at billiards.colostate.edu.
               •   I recently released an instructional video DVD. If you are interested, you can view
                   excerpts online at billiards.colostate.edu.
               •   If you don’t have access to the Internet, or if you have a slow connection (e.g., a
                   modem), you may want to view the NV, HSV, and TP resources from a CD-ROM
                   instead. To order one, send a check or money order (payable to David Alciatore) for
                   $21.45 (includes S&H) to: Pool Book CD; 626 S. Meldrum St.; Fort Collins, CO
                   80521. The CD-ROM is compatible with both PCs and MACs.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” (2004, Sterling
Publishing).
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/just_how_big_are_the_pockets_anyway_part_ii.pdf
title: Just How Big are the Pockets, Anyway? - Part II
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                           ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Just How Big are the Pockets, Anyway? – Part II”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV 3.15) help you locate the resources on the
website. You might also want to view the resources from a CD-ROM. See the website for more
details.

    In last month’s article, I presented several principles concerning factors that contribute to
making some shots more difficult than others based on speed, angle to the pocket, and pocket
contact point. All of the principles and effects I presented can be summarized with a collection of
graphs I will show in this and next month’s articles. All of these graphs were generated from
detailed, physics-based, technical analyses (see TP 3.5 and TP 3.6). Being the compulsive
analytical person that I am, it wasn’t good enough to just have an intuitive feel for some of the
principles I described and demonstrated in last month’s article. I wanted to know exactly how
much a shot’s margin for error changes with angle and distance from the pocket and with speed.
The diagrams in this article show some of the results of this detailed analysis. The technical
analyses won’t be of interest to most readers (unless you are a geeky engineer or physicist), but
the results should be very interesting to most readers.
                  TP 3.5 – Effective target sizes for slow shots into a side pocket at different
                      angles
technical proof   TP 3.6 – Effective target sizes for slow shots into a corner pocket at different
                      angles

     Diagram 1 shows how the effective target size for slow shots into both side and corner
pockets varies as a function of the angle to the pocket. I know this graph might be intimidating to
you if you are not used to looking at stuff like this, so I will do my best to make it understandable.
The inset drawings illustrate what the terms mean. The angle to the pocket is measured from
the straight-in direction; so for a corner pocket, the largest possible angle is 45°, where the object
ball is rolling along the rail into the pocket. For a side pocket, the angle to the pocket can be
much larger. The effective target size is a measure of how “big” the pocket is for a given angle
to the pocket. As you know from experience, a pocket is a lot “smaller” when the angle to the
pocket is large, especially for a side pocket.

     Now back to how to read the graph. The vertical scale labels a pocket’s effective target size,
in inches. The horizontal scale labels the angle to the pocket, in degrees. The solid curve shows
the analysis results for a side pocket and the dashed curve shows the results for a corner pocket.
For each angle to the pocket, the height of the curve tells you the effective target size for that
angle. For example, for point “A” on the corner pocket curve, the angle to the pocket (reading
down) is about 40º and the effective target size (reading left) is about 3.5 inches.

    Notice that a side pocket has the largest effective target size at small angles to the pocket,
but the size falls off dramatically as the angle from the center increases (see Principle 12).
Notice that the corner pocket effective target size is smaller than the side pocket for most pocket
angles, but the corner pockets are more favorable at shallow angles to the rails (close to 40° from
the pocket center). This effect is due to the ability of the ball to go in after hitting the rail (see last
month’s article and NV 3.15), increasing the effective size of the pocket.
                                                              4 in

               Effective pocket target size for a slow shot
                                                                         fast
                                                                         medium
                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                         slow

                                                              3 in
                                                                                                          corner
                                                                                                          pocket
                                                                                                                                   B
                                                              2 in

                                                                                                                 target
                                                                                          target                  size
                                                                                           size
                                                              1 in
                                                                                                    angle to          angle to            side
                                                                                                                     the pocket
                                                                                                   the pocket
                                                                                                                                         pocket

                                                              0 in

                                                                         -60º     -40º    -20º                  0º           20º       40º       60º
                                                                                              Angle to the pocket

    Diagram 1 Effective pocket target sizes for a slow shot based on the angle to the pocket

Principle 12 Beware of large side pocket angles

The side pocket effective target size (and margin for error) decreases dramatically as the
angle to the pocket increases (see Diagram 1).

•     When the ball is hit harder, the effective size is even smaller (see Diagram 3).

                                                              NV 3.15 – Large target size for shallow angle rail shots
normal video

     To help visualize some of the conclusions you can draw from Diagram 1, Diagram 2
illustrates the shot directions for the two points labeled “A” and “B” on the corner pocket curve.
Point “A” corresponds to an angle to the pocket of 43º and the effective pocket target size for that
angle is 3.4 inches. This is the largest effective pocket size compared to all other angles to the
pocket; therefore, shots from that direction are the easiest to make in the corner pocket at slow
speeds. Point “B” corresponds to an angle to the pocket of 31º and the effective pocket target
size for that angle is 2.4 inches. This is much smaller (30% less) than the size for point “A,” so
shots along the point “B” direction are much more (30% more!) difficult to convert than shots
along the “A” direction at slow speeds.
                                                                             fast
                                                                             medium
                                                                             slow

                                                                                        31º

                                                                                      43º
          direction B has an                                                                                                        direction A has the
         effective target size                                                                                                 largest effective target size
         much smaller than                                                                  B             A                   of any direction to the corner
              direction A                                                                                                        pocket due to possible
                                                                                                                                  interaction with the rail

                                                              Diagram 2 Example points from the graph in Diagram 1

     Diagram 3 shows the results for the effective target size for fast shots into both side and
corner pockets, as a function of the angle to the pocket. Notice that both pockets have the
largest effective target size at small angles to the pocket. The size still falls off dramatically for
the side pocket as the angle is increased. But the corner pocket effective size is still smaller for
all angles to the pocket. This is because near rail deflections result in missed shots at high
speeds (see last month’s article and NV 3.12 through NV 3.14). Also, by comparing Diagram 3
to Diagram 1, you can see that the effective target size of a pocket is smaller at higher speeds
(see Principle 13).

                                                       4 in
          Effective pocket target size for slow shot

                                                                    fast
                                                                    medium
                                                                    slow
                                                                                                                                       side
                                                                                                                                      pocket
                                                       3 in

                                                                                                           corner
                                                                                                           pocket
                                                       2 in

                                                                                                                   target
                                                                                            target                  size
                                                                                             size
                                                       1 in
                                                                                                      angle to          angle to
                                                                                                     the pocket        the pocket

                                                       0 in

                                                                    -60º       -40º         -20º                  0º           20º    40º      60º
                                                                                                Angle to the pocket

 Diagram 3 Effective pocket target sizes for a fast shot based on the angle to the pocket
                   TP 3.7 – Effective target sizes for fast shots into a side pocket at different angles
                   TP 3.8 – Effective target sizes for fast shots into a corner pocket at different
technical proof
                       angles

Principle 13 Slower speed, bigger pockets

The effective target size of a pocket decreases at higher speeds (see Diagram 1 and
Diagram 3).

•     You must be more accurate for faster shots.
•     When the ball is hit harder, the ball is more prone to rattle out, especially if the near rail is
      glanced first (see NV 3.12 through NV 3.14).

                   NV 3.12 – Side-pocket near-point effects
                   NV 3.13 – Corner-pocket near-rail effects
normal video       NV 3.14 – Near rail rattle

    The analyses used to create the plots in Diagrams 1 and 3 above also quantify how far away
from the pocket center you should aim. The detailed analysis and results can be found in TP 3.9.
The most important conclusions are summarized in Principle 14.

                   TP 3.9 – Pocket target center offsets based on angle to the pocket
technical proof

Principle 14 Pocket center

The center of the pocket is not always the best place to aim.

•     You should aim at the geometric center of the pocket opening only for straight-in shots. For
      shots approaching the pocket at an angle, adjust your aim from the center towards the far
      inside wall of the pocket (see Diagram 3).
•     Hitting the near rail or near point creates rail-induced English that can cause the ball to rattle
      out of the pocket, especially at high speed (see HSV 3.3 through HSV 3.8).
•     Sometimes it is desirable to cheat the pocket when you have a straight-in shot but need
      deflection of the cue ball away from the impact line. English-induced throw can also be used
      to help cheat the aiming direction. These topics will be covered in a future article.

                   HSV 3.3 – Side pocket miss due to near point deflection
                   HSV 3.4 – Side pocket miss off far pocket wall
                   HSV 3.5 – Side pocket near miss due to wall rattle
high-speed video   HSV 3.6 – Side pocket rattle out
                   HSV 3.7 – Corner pocket, in off near point
                   HSV 3.8 – Corner-pocket miss due to near rail deflection

    I hope you are enjoying my series of articles on “Just How Big are the Pockets, Anyway?”. In
next month’s article, I will show how distance to the pocket, distance between the cue ball and
object ball, and cut angle can be factored into the analysis. I will show some cool plots that
summarize most of the margin-for-error factors in one place.

Good luck with your game, and practice hard,
Dr. Dave
PS:
        •   If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can
            access them online at billiards.colostate.edu.
        •   I recently released an interactive instructional video DVD. If you are interested, you
            can view excerpts online at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” (2004, Sterling
Publishing).
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/just_how_big_are_the_pockets_anyway_part_iii.pdf
title: Just How Big are the Pockets, Anyway? - Part III
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                         ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Just How Big are the Pockets, Anyway? – Part III”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., TP 3.10) help you locate the resources on the
website. You might also want to view the resources from a CD-ROM. See the website for more
details.

     In my last two articles, I presented several principles concerning factors that make some
shots tougher than others. I covered the effects of speed, angle to the pocket, and aim point.
The purpose of this month’s article is to take things a little further by including the effects of
distance between the cue ball, object ball, and pocket. Everybody knows that the further away a
ball is from a pocket, the more difficult the shot. This month’s article quantifies this and shows
how the results vary with side and corner pockets.

     In Technical Proofs TP 3.10 and TP 3.11, I derive the allowable margin of error for different
distances from a pocket. As I point out on my website, if you don’t have a strong background in
mathematics and physics, the technical proofs may not be of interest to you and you should
proceed at your own risk (... just kidding). However, the results, which I present in graphical form,
should be of interest to most people. Diagrams 1 through 4 are plots of the results for side and
corner pockets at slow and fast speeds. The curves in the diagrams show allowable object ball
angle errors at different positions on the table. The allowable error is a measure of the required
shooting accuracy. For example, a margin of error of 3° implies that the object ball can be
pocketed with an error in the target-line-angle as large as 3°. In the diagrams, if the object ball
lies on or within one of the angle error curves, then the object ball can be pocketed as long as the
shot angle error is no more than the value reported. The two shots (“A” and “B”) shown in
Diagram 1 help illustrate the type of conclusions you can make. Neither shot has a cut angle,
and both are the same distance from the pocket. However, the object ball margins of error are
quite different: 3º for shot “A” and 1.5º for shot “B.” Therefore, shot “B” would be twice as difficult
to make as shot “A.”
                      fast
                      medium
                      slow

                               B

                   allowable                 3°
                  object ball
                  angle error      2°                   A
                          1.5°

                      Diagram 1 Side pocket margin of error regions for a slow shot

                      fast
                      medium
                      slow

                                                                      3°
                                     allowable              2°
                                    object ball 1.5°
                                    angle error

                    Diagram 2 Corner pocket margin of error regions for a slow shot

                      TP 3.10 – Pocket margin of error regions for a slow shot
technical proof
                      fast
                      medium
                      slow

                                                 3°
                   allowable
                  object ball
                  angle error         2°
                               1.5°

                      Diagram 3 Side pocket margin of error regions for a fast shot

                        fast
                        medium
                        slow

                                                                         3°

                                            allowable          2°
                                           object ball 1.5°
                                           angle error

                    Diagram 4 Corner pocket margin of error regions for a fast shot

                     TP 3.11 – Pocket margin of error regions for a fast shot
technical proof

    Diagrams 5 and 6 illustrate how Diagrams 1 through 4 can be useful in helping you
understand shot selection. Diagram 5 shows two different object ball positions, both of which
have the same cut angle and distance to the corner pocket. The question is which shot would be
easier, assuming that either shot would create equally good position for the next shot (and
assuming you can avoid a scratch with shot “A”). An inexperienced player might think each shot
is equally easy (or difficult). However, as shown by the curves, shot “A” would be easier to
execute because its margin of error is 2º vs. 1.5º for shot “B.” That means shot “A” would be 33%
easier than shot “B.”

                fast
                medium             A
                slow                                                the cut angle
                                                                     is the same
                                         B                         for both shots
                    the cue ball is
                 the same distance
                   from both shots                      2°
                                             1.5°

                  Diagram 5 Choosing a shot based on the margins of error

    Diagram 6 shows an example where you need to decide between a corner or side pocket
shot for a given object ball location. Three different object ball locations (“a,” “b,” and “c”) are
shown. For each of these shots, the cut angle to the side pocket is the same as the cut angle to
the corner pocket. Then how do you decide which pocket is easier to shoot at? With the margin
of error regions shown, the answer is clear for each object ball position. Position “a” is within the
corner pocket region and outside of the side pocket region; therefore, the corner pocket is the
clear best choice. Position “b” is within both regions and equally close to each region boundary;
so in this case, both pockets have the same level of difficulty, so you should pick the one that
feels the most comfortable. Position “c” is well within the side pocket region and just outside of
the corner pocket region; therefore, the side pocket is the clear best choice in that case.
                                                        same cut angle to
                                                     side and corner pockets

                overlapping                                     a
            2° margin of error
               regions for a
                 slow shot
                                                            b

                                                        c

             Diagram 6 Deciding whether to shoot at the side or corner pocket

    The margin of error region plots above deal with object ball angle error, which corresponds
to how close the object ball path needs to be to the target line. As Diagram 7 illustrates, the
allowable cue ball angle error, measured relative to the desired aiming line, needs to be even
more accurate than that. This is because a small error in cue ball aim translates into a much
larger error in the object ball direction, especially for larger cut angles (see TP 3.12).
Furthermore, a shot’s difficulty increases as the distance between the object ball and the pocket
increases, as the distance from the cue ball to the object ball increase (see Principle 15), and as
the cut angle increases (see Principle 16). If all three measures increase together, the difficulty
level increases and your margin of error decreases dramatically. A detailed analysis and plots
showing the effects of cue ball distance, cut angle, and cut angle error can be found in TP 3.12.
                                                object ball
                                                angle error

                             cue ball
                            angle error

                   aiming                                     target
                     line                                      line

                                          distance between
                                           the cue ball and
                                              object ball

                      Diagram 7 Cut angle error and object ball angle error

Principle 15 Closer to the object ball is better

The margin of error decreases dramatically as the distance between the cue ball and
object ball increases (see TP 3.12).

•     The margin of error also decreases with distance between the object ball and the target.
•     The margin of error also decreases with cut angle (see Principle 16).

Principle 16 Smaller cut angle is much better

The margin of error decreases dramatically as the cut angle increases (see TP 3.12).

•     The margin of error also decreases with distance between the object ball and the target.
•     The margin of error also decreases with distance between the cue ball and object ball (see
      Principle 15).

                  TP 3.12 – Object ball angle error based on cut angle
technical proof

     Well, by now you might be thinking: “All of these plots are cool (or maybe not), but how can I
use them in my game?” In case you haven’t noticed, most tables don’t have all of these
complicated curves drawn on the cloth to help you out. I’m fairly geeky, being an engineer, and
even I don’t have the shapes drawn on my table (although I have been tempted to do this). I
figure the diamonds are there to help you aim kick and bank shots, why not add some margin of
error shapes to the cloth? Anyway, given this, how are the plots useful? To me, what is
important is understanding the main principles involved (see Principles 7 through 16 in my last
three articles). I think the two most important things to remember and keep in mind are:
        1. The side pockets are “bigger,” especially for small angles to the pocket.

        2. The corner pockets are “bigger” for shots close to the rail, especially when hit softly.

Maybe you instinctively knew these things already, but now you know the details of why and how
much. I hope you have enjoyed my series of articles dealing with “Just How Big are the Pockets,
Anyway?” I know it may have been a little dry for a non-analytical kind of person, but I hope you
still gained some insight from the principles and plots.

Good luck with your game, and practice hard,
Dr. Dave

PS:
        •   If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can
            access them online at billiards.colostate.edu.
        •   I recently released an interactive instructional video DVD. If you are interested, you
            can view excerpts online at billiards.colostate.edu.
        •   FYI, over the next three years I will be presenting a multimedia seminar across the
            country, sponsored by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. The title is
            “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards.” The talks are usually open to the
            public, so periodically check out the dates and locations on my website. It would be
            fun to have some BD readers (and not just engineers) in the audience.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” (2004, Sterling
Publishing).
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/kicking_safe.html
title: Kicking Safe - February 2010
topics: cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
Kicking Safe - February 2010 - Tom Ross
Free Billiard Library > Tom Ross > Kicking Safe - February 2010
Kicking Safe - February 2010
People often ask me what makes pool so great and, because there are so many
aspects to our game, my answer usually depends on the most recent piece of
artistry that I've witnessed. Most often however I point either to the game's
complexity, which I always insist exceeds that of all other games, or the
element that is completely absent from other leisure sports such as golf or
bowling, namely safety. Because almost everyone begins playing pool simply
shooting at balls with no regard for the opponent, that day when a player learns
to control the opponent with safety probably marks the biggest and most powerful
single step to the next level that one makes in a pool education.
On Disc III of the Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots Dr. Dave and I present a
thorough discussion of strategies for running out and winning along with a
series of specialty offensive shots and a complete discussion of safeties and
replies to safeties. In the diagram we see two of my favorite safeties from the
series that can apply in all pool games even though we see them here as 9-Ball
examples. Both employ a technique that we need when we cannot shoot directly at
an object ball near a rail, a technique I call the short kick.
In shot A you have the 8 ball and 9 ball left on the table with no good shot
on the 8. One option is to play the 8 ball into the corner rail first but, with
this setup, not the smart choice for two reasons. One, rail-first shots can be
difficult and if you missed the 8 and left it hanging in the corner, it's a sure
sell out. Two, after coming off of the rail and hitting the 8 the cue ball is
rolling away from the 9 and, even with a soft hit, could easily land too far
down table to leave a good shot on the 9. Trying to hit the shot with enough
speed to send the cue ball down table and bring it back up for the 9 is
difficult and far too unpredictable for the winning player. Option two is a
safety that, with a little practice, is simple to execute consistently and
yields a very effective result.
To play the safety you will go rail first at the 8 with a below-center hit to
stop the cue ball and send the 8 along the dotted line to land near the spot
marked X. The first great thing about this shot is that you will hit it the same
way you would to play a stop shot if you were shooting directly at the 8 ball.
There is no need to learn anything new, only to apply what you already know to a
new situation, going rail first for a full hit on the 8 with stop. The one
tricky aspect of this shot is that when the cue ball is hit below center with
draw or stop it rebounds more sharply from the rail. Thus you will need to aim
at the rail slightly closer to the 8 ball than you may guess initially. Practice
the shot at first without the obstructing ball to clear the distraction and to
learn its pure elements. Experiment with your hit on the cue ball and the speed
to move the 8 ball where you want it. Then, replace the obstruction and execute
the safety.
Shot B is somewhat more advanced but illustrates the possibilities available
on the shot we are playing. In this setup a stop shot would leave the cue ball
in front of the 9 and therefore give up a shot on the 8. So now we must progress
a step further to go rail first with draw to hit the 8 and move the cue ball
back behind the 9 along the solid line in the diagram, essentially the same as
shot A but with draw. Begin practicing again without the obstruction to learn
the technique more quickly. First, take lower hit on the cue ball, go rail first
for a full hit on the 8 and play the shot until the cue ball is drawing back a
diamond segment or so near the rail. Continue shooting now with attention to
speed making sure to leave the 8 ball up table. Again, when you have a feel for
the elements of the shot, replace the obstruction and execute the safety. Shot B
is a little trickier than the first shot with the extra element of control
required but simple enough to lie within reach of any player who can draw the
cue ball a foot. It certainly is a pretty shot, sure to strike fear into an
opponent and raise an applause from a savvy audience.
Often in pool you will encounter new shots that do not require new knowledge
or skill but merely a different perspective. The stop and draw shots that we are
working with this month are the same ones that you know already except that you
will go rail first with them. As a side note, I'm not embarrassed to say that
relatively few shots in my personal library of pool knowledge are ones that I
discovered alone. Most are shots I learned from other players, teachers, books
and videos. Shot B, while I'm sure is not my invention, is one of my own
discoveries and it came out for me a few years ago as a mistake when I was
fooling around with an attempt at something else. So here is the
"mistake" that I wish I had made a few years sooner and one that I now
share with everyone.
Need Help? 24 Hour Response M-F
Monthly Newsletter
Customer Service
Do you have questions about your
order, shipping status or returns or do you need information on
our products or about placing an order with us email us at sales@ozonebilliards.com
Sign Up for
our free monthly email newsletter which includes articles from Tom Ross, Certified Billiard Instructor
and other great information about new products and special offers.
Enter
Email Address
En Espanol
Si tiene preguntas en espanol
mande correo electronico a espanol@ozonebilliards.com
Home
| Info
| Shopping Cart
| Billiard Supplies
| Shipping Info
| Privacy
Policy | Site Index
Check Out Some of Our Most Popular Items
Pool
Balls
| Pool Table Lights
| Cue Racks
| Pool Table
Felt | Pool Cue Cases
| Viking Cues
| | Lucasi
Cues
| McDermott Cues
| Cuetec Cues | Predator Cues
| Scorpion Cues
| Joss Cues
| Meucci Cues
Copyright 2001-Present Ozone Billiards, Inc.
Free Billiard Library > Tom Ross > Kicking Safe - February 2010
Kicking Safe - February 2010
Free articles, new product info & special offers
About Us
Customer Service
Shopping Cart
Clearance
Billiard Supplies
Pool Cues by Brand
Pool Cues by Price
Pool Cue Cases
Pool Balls
Pool Ball Racks
Cue Racks & Holders
Pool Cue Accessories
Pool Table Accessories
Pool Table Felt
Pool Table Lights
Billiards Books & DVDs
Clothing & Apparel
Specialty Items
Billiard Posters & Signs
Bar Stools
Pub Tables
Dart Supplies
Table Tennis
Customer Service
My Account
Order Status
Wish List
Ozone Rewards
Billiard Supplies Pool Cues by BrandPool Cues by PricePool BallsPool Cue CasesDart SuppliesDart Boards
HomeNew ProductsBest SellersClearanceEngrave On CuesFree Billiard LibraryPool On TVCustomer Feedback
What Our Customers Say
Read more...
Best Sellers
- Yahoo Store Design
.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/kiss_shot_direction_control.pdf
title: Kiss Shot Direction Control
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Kiss Shot Direction Control”                                                  ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

   Do you know how to predict and control object ball (OB) direction when it is kissed off another frozen or
nearby OB? I cover this topic in detail in online video NV L.60, and I summarize the useful principles below.

Straight Shots
     It helps to first understand a basic stop shot. With a square hit, a sliding cue ball (CB) delivers all its speed
to the OB and stops in place. If there is another OB a small gap away from the 1st OB, with all balls along the
same line, both the CB and 1st OB nearly stop in place as the CB speed is delivered to the 2nd OB. If the two
OBs are frozen instead, with no gap, a sliding CB drifts back slightly and the 1st OB moves forward slightly. If
you want to know why this happens, see online analysis TP B.29. You might find the concluding results at the
bottom of the analysis interesting. When hitting into frozen OBs, the CB and 1st OB motions are more
pronounced with faster shot speed. Backspin on the CB can also help send the 1st OB forward even more.
The video demonstrates all these effects along with interesting game-situation examples.

    Remember, with even a tiny gap between two OBs, the action of the shot is totally different from a frozen-
OB shot. With a gap and more speed, the 1st OB goes forward a little, but not like with a frozen-ball shot. Even
with backspin, it is very difficult to push the 1st OB forward very much if there is a small gap between the balls.
Again, see the video for clear demonstrations.

Angled Shots
     With a small gap between the OBs, the angle of the 1st OB does not vary much with the incoming CB angle
(with a square hit on the 1st OB). The 1st ball heads very close to the tangent line off the 2nd ball. Although,
backspin or topspin on the CB has a small effect on OB direction. Backspin transfers a small amount of topspin
to the OB, sending it slightly forward of the stun line. And topspin transfers a small amount of backspin, pulling
it back from the stun line. The video shows some interesting game-situation examples where you can take
advantage of these effects.

     When the balls are frozen instead, with no gap, the incoming CB angle has a big effect (see Image 1). With
a very thin hit of the 8 off the 13, the 8 heads along the tangent line direction (1st line on the right side of the
image). With a small angle into 13, the 8 gets pushed forward slightly (2nd line). With a more direct hit, the 8 is
driven more forward of the tangent line (3rd line). And with an even fuller hit, with the aim shown in the image,
the 8 is driven well forward (line on the left). As demonstrated in the video, backspin sends the 8 slightly forward
of the expected lines, and topspin pulls the 8 slightly back from the expected lines.

Billiards Digest                                        1                                               December 2024
                                 Image 1 Frozen-ball kiss direction changes

10-Times Fuller Aiming System
    There is a useful aiming system that helps you predict kiss direction of the 1st OB when hitting into a frozen
pair at different angles. It is called the 10-times-fuller system, and it was created by fellow-columnist Bob
Jewett. As shown in Image 2, you start by visualizing where you want the 8 to head, in this case to the corner
pocket. Then you visualize a line through the balls (upper black line). To get the 8 to head to the pocket, you
need to hit the 8 into the 13 10-times fuller than the desired 8-ball direction implies. To put it more simply, you
need to aim at a point 1/10 the distance from the ball line to the target line. Here, the line through the balls
points 6 diamonds up from the pocket. 1/10 of that is 6/10, so you need to aim slightly more than a half diamond
from 6 to get the 10-times-fuller aim (yellow line). Over such a long distance like this, your measurements, aim,
and stroke need to be near perfect. Any error basically gets multiplied by a factor of 10, and even a tiny angle
error can cause a miss over such a large distance. But if you are extremely careful with everything, the 10-
times-fuller system can be very effective.

                                       Image 2 10-times-fuller system

Billiards Digest                                      2                                              December 2024
      For shots like the one in Image 3, where the 8 is being driven in a direction much closer to the tangent line,
it is easier to measure things differently. First visualize the tangent line (white line), and then the desired OB
direction (black line to the corner). Then take the distance between the lines (yellow line labelled “1”) and add
9 more to make the hit 10-times fuller (where the cue is pointing off the left side of the image). The 8 will head
1/10 of the way from the tangent line to the shot line, in the desired direction. Again, a detailed demonstration
can be found in the video.

                                    Image 3 Alternative 10-times-fuller aim

Off-Angle Shots
     For many of the examples in the video, I placed the CB along the required aiming line for a square hit on
the 1st OB, as you would do with ball in hand, but the system also works with angled hits. Image 4 shows a
game situation example where an angled hit is required. This is a frozen spot-shot that can come up in any
game where balls are spotted on the foot spot (for example, One Pocket). The line through the OBs heads into
the middle of the foot rail. I want to pocket the 8 in the corner, which is 2 diamonds away. The 10-times-fuller
system predicts that to send the 8 in this direction, I need to aim the 8 ten-times fuller into the 13. 1/10 of 2
diamonds is 1/5, so the 8 needs to be aimed 1/5 of a diamond (or 2 tenths) inside the middle diamond (yellow
line). The CB is not on this line, but I can still cut the 8 (white line) to create the required direction. Again, if
you are very careful with everything, you should pocket the 8 in the corner. Online video NV L.60 covers many
other examples that shows how to use the system in many different types of interesting game situations.

Billiards Digest                                       3                                               December 2024
                                      Image 4 Off-angle 10-times-fuller example

     I hope you now better understand how to control OB direction when it is close to or frozen to another OB.
I also hope you think the 10-times-fuller system is worth learning and practicing. Be sure to check out and try
everything in the video if you want to be able to use this information effectively.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                     NV L.60 – Useful Direction Control with Small-Gap and Frozen-Ball Kiss Shots
   normal video

                     TP B.29 – Simulation of a CB striking two frozen OBs along their line of centers
   technical proof

PS:
      •     I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
            with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
            to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                          4                                              December 2024
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/large_angle_banks.pdf
title: Large Angle Banks
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Large-Angle Banks”                                                           ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     Last month, I presented the new twice-plus-tenths sliding-ball bank-shot aiming system (see Diagram 1
and online video NV L.32), which is very accurate over a wide range of banking angles, much larger than with
most diamond systems. However, even the twice-plus-tenths system breaks down at angles above the 7.7-to-
3.5 line in Diagram 1. In this article, I present two additional systems useful for aiming large angle, sliding banks
into corner or side pockets. Remember, with sliding banks, if the object ball (OB) is not close to the rail, fast
speed is required to ensure sliding. However, when the OB is close to the cushion, almost any speed can be
used.

                                    Diagram 1 Twice-Plus-Tenths system

     Diagram 2 shows a good system developed by Paul Schofield for aiming long, sliding banks from up table.
If you label the diamonds on the short rail 8, 10, and 12, the system uses a simple 2-to-1 through-diamond aim.
Shooting from 8 to 4, or 10 to 5, or 12 to 6, or any 2-to-1 track in between banks to the far corner. As shown in
Image 1 from video NV L.31, I set up diamond-number balls on the rails so you can easily see the system being
applied at the table. In the video, I pocketed banks along each of the system lines; but be aware that with long
banks like this, if your aim is off even a hair, or if you put even a touch of sidespin on the cue ball (CB) by
mistake, you can easily miss.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      December, 2023
                                   Diagram 2 Schofield 8-10-12 system

    As demonstrated in the video, the system also works for any lines between and even slightly outside the
reference lines. For example, in Image 1, I am aiming the 11 right between five and six at five and a half, and
my cue is crossing the rail right between ten and twelve at eleven. Since eleven is twice five and a half, the
bank goes as expected.

                                    Image 1 Schofield system tweener

Billiards Digest                                                                                 December, 2023
     Jerry Briesath came up with a simple system for banking sliding balls at large angles into side pockets. As
shown in Diagram 3, it connects whole diamonds on the short rail to half diamonds starting a 1 on the long rail.
All three banking lines, and anything in between, go to the side. Again, as shown in Image 2 from video NV
L.31, I’ve placed numbered balls on the rails so you can easily see the lines at the table. As demonstrated in
the video, the 1-to-1 line goes a little long. Instead, you need to aim from a hair more than 1 on the short rail to
a hair less than 1 on the long rail. The 2-to-2 and 3-to-3 lines play true. Image 2 shows an example shot,
aiming between the reference lines. In this case, I am aiming right in between two and three at two and a half
on both rails. As the system predicts, the shot goes.

                                Diagram 3 Briesath diamond-connect system

                                      Image 2 Briesath system tweener

Billiards Digest                                                                                     December, 2023
     My twice-plus-tenths system is demonstrated in online video NV L.32, and the Schofield and Briesath
systems are demonstrated in online video NV L.31. I hope these sliding-ball diamond systems help you bank
balls more effectively. They sure have helped my banking accuracy over a wide range of angles. Just be
aware that, as with all kicking and banking systems, slight adjustments might be required on different tables
under different conditions, especially Diamond-brand tables, which bank short under typical conditions.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV L.30 – SLIDING BANK SHOT DIAMOND SYSTEMS … How to Aim Banks at Fast-Speed
                       or Close-to-the-Cushion
                   NV L.31 – DIAMOND SYSTEMS for Aiming LARGE-ANGLE Sliding Bank Shots into Corner
   normal video        and Side Pockets
                   NV L.32 – TWICE-PLUS-TENTH … The Most Useful Bank Shot Diamond System You’ll Ever
                       Learn

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        December, 2023
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/legal_fouls.pdf
title: Legal Fouls
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Legal Fouls”                                                                 ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     Recently, I posted a video on YouTube showing elevated-cue follow shots that might be considered fouls
under a strict interpretation of the rules. Diagram 1 illustrates the shot in the video, which can be viewed
online at NV H.1. The shot is from a game of 8-ball where we need to elevate the cue to clear the obstacle 3
ball. We need to follow forward after pocketing the 1 to get a shot at the 2 to continue the run-out. If you
shoot this shot and look at the cue ball (CB) after, you will notice a trail of chalk marks. That’s because the tip
skips across and hits the CB surface multiple times as it pushes the CB forward with the elevated hit. Watch
NV H.1 and you will clearly see the multiple chalk marks, sometimes as many as 10 or more, and sometimes
extending almost over half of the CB’s circumference. Given this, do you think this shot is a foul?

                         Diagram 1 Elevated-cue follow shot over an obstacle ball

    With a strict interpretation of the rules, where multiple hits or prolonged tip contact is not allowed, these
shots might be considered fouls. However, would this be the appropriate ruling in these situations? What if
you ask a referee to clean the CB before an opponent’s shot like this, and then ask the referee to inspect the
CB after the hit. Would the evidence of multiple hits (i.e., the multiple chalk marks and skids) be sufficient to
rule the shot a foul? It is probably not appropriate to declare this shot illegal because there is no clear
evidence of a multiple hit during the shot. Also, there is no real advantage gained by the unintentional (and
unnoticeable) multiple hits. With no direct evidence of a foul during the shot, the shot should be considered
legal.

    Now, if the cue is too level and a miscue results, where there is secondary contact from the shaft hitting
and riding over the top of the CB, then the shot would definitely be a foul. An example of this is shown in NV
H.1. If it is visually obvious during the shot that the tip contacts the CB multiple times or if the ferrule or shaft
contacts the CB after the initial hit, then the shot is clearly a foul.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      November, 2016
     With enough cue elevation, it is possible to execute the shot in Diagram 1 with a single clean hit.
However, it is best to limit cue elevation because more elevation can hurt shot accuracy. NV H.1 shows an
example of a clean elevated hit. Looking at the CB after the shot, it was clear that the tip hit the CB only
once. So this shot is obviously legal, even under an overly strict and narrow interpretation of the rules. You
might think it would be obvious if the shot is a foul or not by the look or sound of the hit, but the clean-hit
elevated shot feels and looks no different than the slightly-lower-elevation shots that did involve multiple hits.
This is clear in the video examples. There is really no way to detect the difference in hit, other than by looking
at the chalk marks on the CB after the shot. Regardless, none of the shots in NV H.1 should be considered
illegal, except for the miscue with obvious multiple hits.

    In Mike Shamos’ Dec ’15 “You Make The Call” article, he actually suggested that if a referee saw the
multiple chalk marks on the CB after an elevated-cue shot, he or she would need to call a foul as a result of
the double-hit rule. Mike cites WSR Rule 6.7: “If the cue stick contacts the cue ball more than once on a shot,
the shot is a foul.” He also suggested that it is not “good for the game to outlaw elevated-cue shots, and the
rule ought to be changed.” He suggested returning to an older version of the rule which was eliminated in
1967 allowing for any “shot made with one continuous stroke of the cue” (even if that stroke resulted in
multiple hits). Obviously, I disagree with Mike’s strict interpretation of the current rule, and I think his
suggestion of allowing any continuous forward stroke of the cue (even with double hits and miscues,
intentional or not) would open up a wide range of shots which would probably be considered as abuses of the
game by most players. Examples of such abuses could include blatant and purposeful double hits, intentional
miscues used to create an advantage, and maybe even push and scoop jump shots (unless those would still
be prohibited by separate rules). These are shots that are strictly forbidden by the current rules. They are
also very easy to detect by anyone familiar and knowledgeable with pool rules, which is unfortunately not the
case with many league players (and even some pros and referees).

    An “anything-goes single continuous stroke” rule would certainly simplify the rules and greatly reduce the
need for a referee or judgment calls, especially with double hits, which often create disagreements among
players. (BTW, for those who want to improve their knowledge and understanding of how to detect and avoid
double hits, see the “double hit” resource page in the “foul” FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.) Another
good thing about a “one continuous stroke” rule is that we would no longer need to know whether or not the
CB and an object ball (OB) are frozen together. Currently, if you shoot into the CB frozen to an OB, the shot
is not a foul; but if you hit into a CB barely not frozen (i.e., just “cold”), with a very small gap between the balls
(even less than the width of a human hair), the shot is a double-hit foul, even though the action of both shots
is quite similar. I always thought this was a bit odd, that with two shots so similar, one is a foul and the other
is not. However, as mentioned above, the new rule could result in much more bad will and arguing since
some of the “new shots” that would now be legal would not be very palatable to the people that lose as a
result of them. Diagram 2 shows some examples of a few of these possible “new” shots.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       November, 2016
               Diagram 2 “New” shots allowed by anything-goes “one continuous stroke” rule

     The shot into the top side pocket is an 8-ball situation (shooting solids) where the 8 is hit into the 11 but it
doesn’t have enough forward roll to follow the 11 into the pocket. But with a double hit of the CB with “one
continuous stroke,” the shot is quite easy for the win. The shot into the bottom side pocket is a classic 9-ball
“cheat” where “one continuous stroke” can be used to hit both the CB and 9-ball with the tip for the win. A
                                                                                                            st
demonstration of this shot, both in regular speed and slow motion, can be found in NV H.7 (the 1 shot).
Although, maybe this “cheat” would be prohibited by a separate rule requiring that the “one continuous stroke”
result in the tip hitting only the CB. The shot into the bottom-right corner is using an off-center and offline hit
into the 2, and a double hit, to send the CB straight to the 3. Double hits with a “one continuous stroke” would
enable CB direction changes like this. The final shot into the upper-left corner is a classic push-shot cheat,
shown here as an 8-ball example. The CB is frozen to the 1, and we are not allowed to hit any of the solids to
pocket the 13. We need to shoot away from the 1, and the 5 and 6 block kick and masse options (although, a
jump-masse shot is still an option). Here, “one continuous stroke,” starting with the cue tip touching the CB,
with an off-center hit and forward push, allows the CB direction shown without moving the 1. Again, maybe a
push shot like this would still be prohibited by a separate rule. A demonstration of the push shot can be found
                   rd
in NV H.7 (the 3 shot). With a little practice, all of the shots in Diagram 2, and other variations on these
themes, are easy to execute. Would we want to allow “new” shots like these with a new anything-goes “one
continuous stroke” rule? My first reaction is no, but part of me (my devious side) likes a rule change that
creates a whole new repertoire of creative shots. What do you think?

     Other examples of illegal shots that a “one continuous stroke” rule might enable are intentional miscues
like those demonstrated in HSV B.28 and scoop jump shots demonstrated in HSV B.2, both of which are
currently illegal. For much more information and demonstrations of all sorts of shots that are and aren’t fouls,
under the current official rules of pool, see the “fouls” resource page in the FAQ section at
billiards.colostate.edu. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                                      November, 2016
                    NV H.1 – Elevated-Cue Pool and Billiards Shots ... Are They Legal?
normal video
                    NV H.7 – Mike Massey trick shot collection (from exhibition)

                    HSV B.2 – Illegal "scoop" jump shots
high-speed video    HSV B.28 – Frozen-ball kiss, miscue, and push shots and fouls

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-
author of the Video Encyclopedias of “Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Pool Practice (VEPP),” and “Eight
Ball (VEEB),” and the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS)” and “Billiard University (BU)”
instructional DVD series, all available at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    November, 2016
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/luckily_dimitri_never_inhaled.pdf
title: Luckily Dimitri Never Inhaled
topics: uncategorized
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
[NO_EXTRACTED_TEXT]
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/magic_spot_kicks.pdf
title: Magic Spot Kicks
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
“Magic Spot Kicks”                                                            ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Recently, Bob Jewett and I created the Video Encyclopedia of One Pocket (VEOP), a 5-volume full-
length instructional video series that covers all the skills, knowledge, strategy, and moves you need to master
this great game.        Complete information, including free online video excerpts, can be found at
DrDaveBilliards.com/VEOP. The series is about one pocket (1P), but many of the shots, techniques, and
principles also apply to other pool games. In this article, I look at a useful 3-rail kicking system presented in
Volume IV of VEOP called the “Magic Spot” symmetric system.

    As shown in Diagram 1, on most pool tables, if you kick with running spin through a certain spot close to
the side pocket, the CB will go 3 rails through a symmetric target on the other side of the table. The diagram
shows three typical 3-cushion tracks based on the Corner-5 System (hence all the diamond numbers). For
more information, see the Corner-5 System resource page at billiards.colostate.edu. Notice how all three
tracks intersect at the “Magic Spot.” Also notice with each track that where the ball ends up after going if 3 rails
(see the dashed circles) is symmetrically across the table from the starting ball position (the solid circles).

                               Diagram 1 Symmetric Corner-5 System tracks

    Image 1 and online video NV K.4 show a good way to test out the Magic Spot system on an unfamiliar
table. First place initial CB direction balls (1, 3, 5) along the rails as shown. Also place symmetric targets (9,
11, 13) on the other side of the table. Then find the shot direction required along a line from each starting ball
position (1, 3, 5) to head off 3 rails to the symmetric target on the other side of the table (9, 11, 13), using
Billiards Digest                                                                                          April, 2023
rolling/running spin (top-right here). You then just need to see where the 3 lines intersect and you will know the
“magic spot” for the table. The location in Diagram 1 or Image 1 is a good starting point if you want to try it out,
but you will need to experiment on a particular table to find the exact spot. The beauty of knowing the “magic
spot” for a particular table is: If you aim through the “magic spot” from almost any direction with running spin,
the CB will go off 3 rails to the symmetric spot across the table.

                                    Image 1 Magic Spot Symmetric kicks

      Image 2 shows a good game-situation example where we can use the magic spot to our benefit. As sown
in online video NV K.4, one option is to attempt to use reverse draw off the right-side rail for a finesse ticky off
the bottom of the 13; but as demonstrated, this type of shot is very difficult to control. The angle, speed, bottom-
spin, and sidespin all need to be just right. A better option here is a 3-rail kick. As shown by the symmetric
target in Image 2, I would like to come into the side rail along above the 9 to try to skim the 9 on the rail side.
My target point is right across from the 1st diamond. Luckily, when I aim the CB through the magic spot, my
cue is over the same spot on the opposite rail. Therefore, I just need to aim through the magic spot to get the
hit I want.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          April, 2023
                                    Image 2 Simple Magic Spot example

   Image 3 shows another example where things aren’t lined up quite as perfectly as the previous example.
Here, aiming through the magic spot has the line of the cue over Bob’s corner; so if he shot along this line, he
would likely pocket the 13. Instead, he wants to go about ½ diamond longer than that. As with the Corner-5
System, he just needs to shift his aim point about ½ diamond farther down the rail to get a good safety with the
CB going off the end rail into the 13 or 9 to settle behind the balls.

                                   Image 3 Another Magic Spot example

    Check out online video NV K.4 to see complete demonstrations of all concepts and examples in this article.
Better yet, try out the system to find your table’s “magic spot.” That way, the next time you need to kick 3 rails
to a symmetric (or close-to-symmetric) target, you won’t need to count diamonds, do calculations, or try to
Billiards Digest                                                                                         April, 2023
visualize or “feel” the correct angle of the shot. You just need to aim at the “magic spot” and fire away. If you
want to learn more about the Magic Spot system, see the resource page at billiards.colostate.edu. And if
you want to learn more about the great game of one-pocket, check out the Video Encyclopedia of One Pocket
(VEOP) in online video NV K.1 and at DrDaveBilliards.com.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV K.1 – Video Encyclopedia of One Pocket (VEOP) Trailer
   normal video
                   NV K.4 – “Magic Spot” System for Aiming Symmetric 3-Rail Kicks, from VEOP-IV

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                            April, 2023
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/mental_game.pdf
title: Mental Game
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Mental Game”                                                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    If you have read my column for any length of time, you know I dedicate a lot of time to pool physics and
cue ball (CB) control. However, many people’s games are limited and held back by the mental aspects of
pool. Even if you have sound fundamentals and good skills in pool, there is no guarantee you will play at a
high level when it counts. If you want to play at your best in competition, you must have a strong mental
game. I recently posted an online video (see NV J.37 and Photo 1) that describes and demonstrates the top
10 most important mental aspects of pool, which are summarized below.

                                         Photo 1 Video title screen

1. Plan and Visualize

    First, it helps to have a consistent and purposeful pre-shot routine, being sure to plan and visualize
successful execution of each shot before getting down to shoot. Also, when thinking or daydreaming about
upcoming matches or tournaments, visualize yourself playing well and winning. This will help create a
confident mindset. But be realistic with your expectations so you don’t create disappointment and lose
enthusiasm and motivation. Also watch past videos of you performing well, especially before a major
tournament. This will help remind yourself of and give you faith in your abilities.

2. Respect and Focus on Every Shot

     Have you ever played a good positional shot and thought the next shot was too easy, and you didn’t give
it enough respect, and you missed it? Give every shot the respect it deserves in terms of attention and focus,
even the “easy” shots. Make it a goal to try your best and give 100% like every shot matters (because they
do!). It is important to do this during practice so you will develop and reinforce this important good habit. Do
it during competitive play also regardless of who you are playing and whether or not you are way behind or
way ahead in a match. Always play your top game and never play down to an opponent or situation. If a
disciplined and purposeful pre-shot routine is well practiced, it won’t take much emotional, mental, or physical
energy to do it. Instead, it will be an effortless and natural habit.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       April, 2020
3. Pull the Trigger with a Clear Mind and Still Eyes

     There should be no uncertainty whatsoever just before or during your stroke. If there is, you should get
up and re-start your pre-shot routine. If you are uncertain with your aim or didn’t plan CB control carefully,
don’t just “Hit It Anyway.” Instead, always be methodical and purposeful. Also, if you are thinking stuff before
the stroke like “Don’t miss,” “Don’t drop your elbow,” or “Don’t scratch in the corner,” your inner subconscious
self (that needs simple and straightforward instructions to perform the stroking action) might only hear the
negative parts (“Miss,” “Drop your elbow,” “Scratch”), especially if there is any doubt or insecurity. Instead,
give yourself clear and positive thoughts and instructions like “Make the shot,” “Hit the middle diamond” and
“Stay down and be still.”

     During the final stroke, there should be no high-level thoughts (or “second thoughts”) whatsoever. You
need to get your mind out of the way of your natural action process. And remember, don’t “pull the trigger”
until the alignment and aim look and feel perfect, with clear and still focus on the target. Then, with a quiet
mind and still body, head, and eyes, trust your trained “muscle memory” to execute the stroke.

4. Create Confidence Through Preparation

    You need to be confident and trusting in your skills and abilities. The only way to develop this is to work
hard to improve your skills, break bad habits, and create new good habits. If you really want to improve and
win more, you must be dedicated, disciplined, and motivated to do this work. Don’t just play during “practice,”
unless you just want to have fun, which is a good thing. To get more benefit from “play” practice, when you
miss a shot or position, diagnose what happened and play it again to learn from the mistake. Even better,
don’t just practice a shot until you make it once … practice it until you make it almost every time. Then similar
mistakes will be much less likely in the future. Be sure to also practice safeties; and repeat them when they
don’t go as planned. Also practice your break, striving to control the CB in the center of the table with a good
look at a shot after the break.

    You should also dedicate serious practice time to doing drill-based skill training, like athletes in all sports
do. This will improve your skills and confidence, but it will also help you develop the discipline you need to
focus and play at a high level. Use score-based drills like the Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP)
and the Billiard University (BU) Playing Ability Exams to add competitive pressure during practice, in trying to
beat your past scores. And video record yourself so you can review and learn from it later.

    Also, play under pressure as much as possible in leagues, tournaments, and gambling matches. The
best way to become good under pressure is to create a history of successful experience under pressure.
Concerning preparing before a match, if you have limited practice time on a table, try to get accustomed to
the table so there won’t be any surprises during the match. In NV J.37, I demonstrate a set of recommended
table test shots.

    And if you are warming up just before playing a match, shoot only typical easy or medium-difficultly shots
to build confidence. Don’t attempt and re-attempt very difficult shots you might miss multiple times just before
a match. Also, be a student of the game … read books, watch instructional videos, watch lots of pro pool
matches online and in person, and get help from an experienced and qualified instructor or coach. All of
these things might help inspire and motivate you to improve.

5. Breath

   Take deep breaths when necessary to fight nerves or break tension. Also take a deep breath (or several
when necessary) to help calm yourself before and after each shot as part of your pre- and post-shot routines,
especially when you are nervous.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         April, 2020
6. Diagnose and Learn from Your Mistakes

    After mistakes, spend less time beating yourself up and spend more time diagnosing what led to or
caused the mistakes so you can better learn from them. Did you not aim carefully while standing? Did you
rush or get up on the shot? Did you swoop or steer the stroke? Did you not account for CB deflection? Did
you not account for cut-induced throw? Consider mistakes as opportunities to improve and get better. If you
can limit how much they happen again in the future, you will become a better player. Keep a performance
journal reporting both good and bad match experiences, and make a record of your mistakes during play so
you can dedicate time to working on these in practice. Also keep a list of prioritized reminders of things you
want to stay aware of and focus on while you are practicing and playing.

7. Focus on the Process, Not the Outcome

    It is good to set goals and think about desired outcomes when not playing; but when playing, focus only
on playing effectively. During a match is not the right time to think about your goals or outcomes. Will I win or
lose this match or the tournament? Will my buddies ever stop teasing me if I get beat by a girl? Will my
FargoRating go down if I lose? These are not helpful thoughts while playing. To win, you just need to
execute one shot at a time. That should be your only goal.

8. Be Aware of Your Mental and Physical State

    Do not try to deny your fears or insecurities. Instead acknowledge and accept them and do your best to
address and manage them. Take deep breaths and use supportive and nurturing self-talk to help calm them.
Process and work on the root causes when not playing, maybe with the help of a sports psychologist. And
have faith and trust in your pre-shot routine, abilities, and skills. “Without trust, your game goes bust.”

     Never give up, even if you are far behind in a match. Don’t’ live in the past, beating yourself up after a
mistake. Be in the present, focusing on the current shot or your next opportunity. When waiting for your turn
at the table, put your mind to good use by studying your opponent’s strategy (thinking about how you might do
things differently or better). You might also learn some things from how your opponent plays the game. Also
study the table for your strategy for when you return.

    Be aware if you are thirsty or hungry, and drink water and eat snacks when necessary (and in moderation
while playing), especially if you have issues with dehydration or blood sugar levels. It is difficult to play at
your best if your body’s physiology is off. Especially make sure you are well hydrated and nourished before
you begin a match.

9. Reset Yourself When Necessary

    After a mistake, or when your attitude is bad, or when you are slouching in probable defeat, take a deep
breadth (or several), drink a sip of water , take a time out and go to the restroom to wash your hands and
face, clean your cue’s shaft, chalk your tip, give yourself pep talks, and do whatever else you need to do to
ready yourself for a fresh start when you return to the table. If you play a shot less than perfectly and leave
yourself bad shape, don’t despair. Instead, reset yourself, pretend your opponent just missed and left you
with a shot and opportunity to win, and say: Woo Hoo! Also, after a really nice or difficult shot, where you
might get an Adrenaline boost and be amped up, or where you might be patting yourself on your back too
much, step away and reset before the next shot. You don’t want to miss an “easy” shot after a masterful
crowd pleaser.

10. Enjoy the Game and Have Fun

     The most import fundamental of pool is to have fun and enjoy playing well (see Photo 2). This is what
will help motivate you to play more and improve. Celebrate and enjoy the moments when you hit a great shot

Billiards Digest                                                                                        April, 2020
or get a big win, and relive these and other moments from the past in your memories and dreams. This will
help keep you enthusiastic and motivated.

     The other important fundaMENTAL of pool is to have a strong mental game, as described in this article.
Try to be aware of and focus on all this stuff during practice and training. That is the only way to develop and
reinforce the good habits you need to excel while playing. You need to practice and train both your physical
and mental game to excel in this wonderful sport.

                                           Photo 2 Important fundamentals

     I hope the information in this article helps you improve your mental game. Everything described is
demonstrated in online video NV J.37. Be sure to watch the video and try to incorporate the advice into your
game. If you want more information, links to many supporting resources can be found in the YouTube video
description. In closing, here's a good 5-word summary of the entire list of 10 topics, with a snappy single-
syllable acronym: Focus, Reset, Enjoy, Visualize, Diagnose (FREVD). Make FREVD your new mantra
when playing pool.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.37 – Top 10 Mental Aspects of Pool – The Mental Game
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        April, 2020
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/miscue_and_scoop_non_fouls.pdf
title: Miscue And Scoop Non Fouls
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Miscue and Scoop Non-Fouls”                                                  ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at drdavepoolinfo.com. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    In a recent online video (NV L.103), I discussed and analyzed three recent questionable foul calls in pro
tournament matches involving draw-shot-miscue scoop shots (see Image 1). The most recent was a shot by
Patric Gonzales against Jayson Shaw in the 2025 Philippines Open. In the video, and in this column, I explore
miscue and scoop shots in detail and make it totally clear when they are legal or not.

                          Image 1 Recent scoop shots in pro tournament matches

    Before continuing, you really should first watch the video so you can see and hear the three shots in
question, especially the Gonzales shot, which is the focus on the analysis. Each shot was called a foul. When
you watch the video, try to judge whether you would call a foul or not if you were the referee. The referees
obviously had better views of the shots live, but use your best judgment.

     A miscue is a bad hit resulting from trying to hit too far out on the cue ball (CB) to apply significant spin. A
scoop shot is a bad hit with an attempted draw or backspin shot, where the CB is launched into the air. With
miscues, secondary contact with the CB often occurs with the tip or side of the cue after the initial hit (see the
left side of Image 2). Secondary contact can also occur with some scoop shots (see the right side of Image 2).

Billiards Digest                                       1                                                 January 2026
                          Image 2 Secondary contact with miscue and scoop shots

     Below is the WPA official rule of pool covering how fouls should be called concerning miscues and scoops.

          2.11 MISCUE

          A miscue occurs when the cue tip slides off the cue-ball possibly due to a contact that is too
          eccentric or due to insufficient chalk on the tip. It is usually accompanied by a sharp sound
          and evidenced by a discoloration of the tip. Although some miscues involve contact of the side
          of the cue-stick with the cue-ball, unless such contact is clearly visible, it is assumed not to
          have occurred. A scoop shot, in which the cue tip contacts the playing surface and the cue-
          ball at the same time, and this causes the cue-ball to rise off the cloth, is treated like a miscue.
          If an unintentional miscue causes the cue-ball to leave the playing surface, including partially
          or fully jumping over a ball, it is treated like a legal jump shot. Note that intentional miscues
          are covered by 3.16 Unsportsmanlike Conduct (c).

     A miscue should not be called a foul unless there is clear visual evidence indicating contact with the side
of the cue. If the evidence is not clear, the benefit of the doubt always goes to the shooter, with no foul called.
The shot could also be called a foul if the miscue is intentional to achieve some advantage for the player.
Several examples of this are demonstrated in the video.

    A scoop shot is treated just like a miscue, and the jumping action of the CB is not penalized. Again, a foul
can be called only if the scoop is intentional, to achieve some advantage, or if there is clear visual evidence of
contact with the side of the cue. Obviously, for the referees to call the scoop shots in question a foul, they must
have thought they saw the side of the cue contact the CB during the shot.

      The online video includes many examples of both miscue and scoop shots. With many of the shots, you
might think the sound indicates the CB is slapped by the side of the cue; but as the video clearly demonstrates,
sound is not a reliable indicator of a foul. And even with slowed-down video replay of normal camera footage,
it is impossible to detect whether there is secondary contact with the tip or side of the cue during miscue and
scoop shots. The framerate of typical video cameras is not nearly fast enough to capture the action of the hit.
The only type of miscue where secondary contact with the side of the cue is obvious is with a topspin miscue
foul where the CB gets trapped under the cue after the shot, as demonstrated in the video.

    Just as with miscue shots, scoop shots can also sound funny, but the reason for this is not because the
side of the cue is smacking the CB. It is because there is a lot of force on the tip as it slams to the table and
launches the CB into the air. Whether the tip hits the CB first and sides down the CB until it reaches the table,
or the tip hits the CB and table at the same time, or the tip hits the table first and slides into the CB, the tip
eventually wedges between the CB and table (see Image 3) and launches the CB up with lots of force (and

Billiards Digest                                         2                                                  January 2026
sound). As demonstrated by numerous examples in the video with different cue tip contact points and cue
elevations, filmed with super-slow-motion video, the side of the cue never contacts the CB during typical scoop
shots. It is the tip and not the side of the cue that launches the CB into the air.

                                        Image 3 Scoop shot tip contact

     In an earlier online video (NV L.101) featuring the Gonzales’ shot and drama surrounding it, many people
commented on social media that they thought the CB was launched into the air by the side of the cue since the
cue rose up quite a bit during the follow through. In response to that, I tried to recreate and mimic the cue-lift
action of the Gonzales shot in my most recent video (NV L.103). I filmed the shot both with a regular video
camera and in slow motion with a high-speed camera, both with clear side views of the shot, and I attempted
to really exaggerate the cue-lift action as much as possible. Even with this recreated shot with cue lift, it was
very clear that there was no contact with the side of the cue during the shot. Again, it is the table-supported tip
that launches the CB into the air, not the side of the cue.

     In the new video, I also show camera footage that the referee had access to during video review. Obviously,
the referee must have thought the side of the cue hit the CB, but my review of the footage showed that there
was no clear evidence of this. Again, a normal video camera is not fast enough to capture everything that
happens during the hit. The available frames from the match video just before, during, and after the hit are
shown in Image 4. In the first frame, the tip is close to hitting the CB. In the very next frame, the hit has already
occurred, with the CB already separated from the tip (although it is tough to tell from this view). And in the very
next frame, the CB is higher and the CB has clearly separated from the tip. And in the very next frame, the CB
is long gone as the cue is continuing to rise. I admit that when watching this shot live, it might seem like the
side of the shaft could be launching the CB into the air. And when the video frames are played at regular speed,
our brains blur or fill in the details between the frames and we might see what we want to see based on certain
beliefs. But there is certainly no clear visual evidence of a foul in this video. And remember, the benefit of the
any doubt always goes to the shooter.

Billiards Digest                                       3                                                 January 2026
                                           Image 4 Gonzales scoop shot

    Again, be sure to watch online video NV L.103 so you can judge for yourself; but based on the video
evidence available and on the analysis and examples in the video, I believe fouls should not have been called
on any of the three shots. Referees are not perfect and they do make mistakes on occasion. Hopefully, videos
and columns like this will help everybody learn from these mistakes in the hope they occur less frequently in
the future.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV L.101 – Controversial Non-Call of WRONG-BALL-HIT-FIRST FOUL
   normal video
                   NV L.103 – When are MISCUE and SCOOP Shots Fouls?

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at drdavepoolinfo.com.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                         4                                                January 2026
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/motions_of_a_billiard_ball_after_a_cue_stroke.pdf
title: Motions of a billiard ball after a cue stroke Hyeong-Chan Kim1
topics: collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills, robotics_and_computation, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
Motions of a billiard ball after a cue stroke

                                                                                                      Hyeong-Chan Kim1
                                                    1
                                                        School of Liberal Arts and Sciences, Korea National University of Transportation, Chungju, 27469, Korea∗
                                                             We study the collision between the cue and the ball in the game of billiards. After studying
                                                           the collision process in detail, we write the (rotational) velocities of the ball and the cue after the
                                                           collision. We also find the squirt angle of the ball for an oblique collision which represents the
                                                           deviation of the ball from the intended direction.

                                                                                                 I.    INTRODUCTION
arXiv:2104.11232v2 [nlin.CD] 29 Apr 2021

                                              In 1835, Coriolis [1] studied the mathematical analysis of billiards for the first time. To my knowledge, it takes more
                                           than one century for another work for the billiard games based on physics [2]. In Refs. [3, 4], the authors considered
                                           the effect of friction on collisions of billiard balls in 2-dimensions. In Ref. [5], Han studied various aspects of the
                                           billiard physics. Mathavan used a fast camera to analyze the ball motions in the billiard games [6] and studied the
                                           motion of the ball under cushion impact [7]. The billiard models were also used to develop a robotics system [8].
                                              A cue stroke on a billiard ball makes the ball run along the line of cue incidence. This ordinary point of view in
                                           billiards games is correct for a head-on collision only between the ball and the cue. Coriolis [1] calculated the outcome
                                           of the collision based on a coefficient of restitution (COR) when the cue strikes the ball’s center with zero impact
                                           parameter. Here, the COR is defined based on the head-on collision. The impact parameter b represents the distance
                                           from the ball’s center to the incident line of the cue. For collisions with a non-vanishing impact parameter, he had
                                           tried the following ansatz: “the fraction of kinetic energy loss is the same as that without the impact parameter.”
                                           This ansatz must be refined by using the impact dynamics now a days.
                                              In the presence of an impact parameter b 6= 0, the ball can be given top/back-spin or side-spin by striking it
                                           above/below or left/right side of its center. Moore [2] presented part of the analysis on the stroke with impact
                                           parameter. To avoid miscue, the phenomenon that the cue slides on the ball so that the ball deviates highly from the
                                           intended direction, the impact parameter should satisfy [9]1

                                                                                                                 b/R
                                                                                            µstatic ≥ tan φ = p           ,
                                                                                                               1 − (b/R)2

                                           where R and µstatic denote the radius of the ball and the coefficient of static friction between the cue-tip and the
                                           ball, respectively. When a cue strikes above/below from its center, the ball may run along the intended path with
                                           top/back-spin.
                                              However, when a cue strikes a side of the center, the ball heads off along a path parallel to the resultant of the
                                           normal and the friction forces. In this oblique collision, a situation commonly encountered in billiards, the ball does
                                           not follow the line of incidence but deflects from the direction by a few degrees. This deflection is commonly known by
                                           billiards players [10, 11] as “squirt” because the ball squirts away from its intended path. Anecdotal evidence indicates
                                           that one can reduce the squirt angle by using a light cue-tip. In Ref. [12], Cross presented experimental data for the
                                           squirt angle. He also presented part of the theoretical resolution based on the bouncing ball model [13].
                                              However, we fail to find a literature which deals a complete theoretical analysis on the squirt based on the impact
                                           dynamics which considers the effect of friction during the collision. Naturally, a mathematical description on the
                                           resulting motions of the ball after the impact based on the fundamental principle of physics, which are one of the
                                           most important parts of the billiard play, is absent. In this work, we analyze the collision process between a cue and
                                           a ball based on the impact dynamics, and analyze the phenomena happening in the process. We find the final state
                                           of the ball after the collision including the squirt, the central velocities, and the angular velocities of the ball and the
                                           cue.

                                           ∗ Electronic address: hckim@ut.ac.kr
                                           1 We refine this formula later in this work.
                                                                                                                             2

                II.   COLLISION BETWEEN A BILLIARD BALL AND A RIGID CUE-STICK

   In figure 1, a cue stick approaches a billiard ball of radius R with impact parameter b. The radius of the cue-tip
is about 6 mm. So the contact point of the cue-tip does not generally coincide with the central axis of the cue. The
normal force F~N acts along a line from the contact point to the center of the ball, while the friction force f~ acts at
right angles to F~N . The resultant force F~ = F~N + f~ acts at an angle θ to the normal-direction, where tan θ = FN /N
defines an effective coefficient of friction between the cue-tip and the ball. If the tip slides on the ball, tan θ = µk ,
where µk is the coefficient of sliding friction. If the tip grips the ball, then µ < µk . If the ball initially static, it will
exit from the cue along the direction parallel to F~ at an angle ψ from the line of incidence of the cue. The angle ψ
commonly called the squirt angle describes the undesirable deflection of the ball from the intended path.

                                     FIG. 1: The collision between the cue and the ball.

   The experimental data in Ref. [12], for well-chalked tips, show that the squirt angle increases almost linearly for
impact parameter b < 0.5 and shows a bit of non-linearlity for larger impact parameters b ∼ 0.5R. The sidespin
obtained from the stroke increases almost linearly with the impact parameter. Even though the experiment was
performed with an unusual cue that produces large squirt angles, the qualitative characteristics will be the same as
those of the ordinary cue.
   Let us analyze the physical situation in detail. We choose the coordinate system so that we can deal the collision
between the ball and the cue-stick easily. If we stroke the cue-stick horizontally, we can ignore the friction between
the ball and the table, which does not play any role. Then, the only important thing is the relative position between
the cue-stick and the ball. In this case, without loss of generality, we locate the coordinate’s origin at the impact
point between the ball and the cue. Besides, the ball’s surface at the contact point is parallel to the (x, z) plane as in
Fig. 1. The direction to the center of the ball is now the y-direction and the cue-stick moves on the (x, y)-plane with
the angle φ with respect to the y-coordinate in clock-wise direction.
   We assume the cue-stick is a rigid body and analyze the collision with the ball in this section. However, an ordinary
cue-stick consists of wood, flexible to impacts orthogonal to the symmetry axis. We consider the effect of this flexibility
in the continuing sections. In this work, we assume that we hold the cue very lightly so that the hand’s force does not
affect the ball during the impact.
   Let us call the cue-part of the impact point Ccue and the ball-part Cball . Then, the displacement vector from the
ball’s center to the impact point is
                                           ~ I ≡ (XI , YI , 0) = (0, −R, 0) = −R ŷ.
                                           R                                                                               (1)
The displacement vector from the center of mass of the cue to the impact point is, along the incidence line of the cue,
                                   ~rc = (xc , yc , 0) = rc (sin φ, cos φ, 0),   0 ≤ φ < 45o .                             (2)
In a usual billiard games with the friction coefficient µ ∼ 0.7, to avoid cue-miss, the impact point should satisfy
φ < 35o usually. In this work, we choose the upper bound of φ to be φ = 45o because it is almost the same as the
Coriolis’ limit of the impact parameter bmax = 0.7R < R sin 45o ≈ 0.707R.
   If the cue is a rigid body, rc corresponds to the distance from the the cue-tip to the center of mass of the cue, which
is 0.7 times the length of the cue roughly. However, for an impact which acts instantly, the cue does not react as if it
                                                                                                                          3

is a rigid body. In this section, we regard the cue acts as if it is a rigid body and formulate the collision process in
general. The non-rigidity which affects on the squirt angle crucially will be dealt in Sec. V. In this section, we study
the details which happens during the collision.
   Now, let us write the equation of motions for the cue and the ball. Let the masses of the cue and the ball be Mc ,
M and their velocities be U ~ and V~ . Let us write their angular velocities as ω     ~ respectively. Then, the equation
                                                                                ~ and Ω,
of motions for of the center of masses for the cue and the ball are
                                                        ~
                                                       dU                  ~
                                                                          dV
                                                  Mc      = −F~ ,     M      = F~ .                                     (3)
                                                       dt                 dt
Here F~ = (Fk , F⊥ , 0) represents the force of the cue acting on the ball. Because the cue moves on the (x, y)-plane,
there is no force along the z-direction. Here, the subscript k and ⊥ represent the parallel x-direction and orthogonal
y-direction to the impact plane, respectively.
  The force exerted by the cue on the ball has two origins: One is the normal force F⊥ to the ball’s surface related
to the cue-tip elasticity and the other is the friction force Fk parallel to the surface. So the force F~ is generally not
parallel to the incidence line of the cue. Adding and integrating the two equations above, we get the following law of
conservation of momentum:
                                                            ~ + MV
                                                         Mc U    ~ = Mc U
                                                                        ~i ,                                            (4)

where the right-hand side denotes the initial momentum of the cue.
   Let the rotational inertia of the cue and the ball be Ic = νc Mc rc2 and I = νM R2 , respectively. For the case of a ball
of uniform density ν = 2/5 and for an object with a skewed mass such as a cue, it is roughly νc ≃ 0.136, respectively.
Then, the angular equation of motion of the cue is
                                             d~
                                              ω
                                        Ic      = ~rc × (−F~ ) = rc (cos φFk − sin φF⊥ )ẑ.                             (5)
                                             dt
Here, ~rc is the displacement (2) from the center of mass of the cue to the impact point Ccue . The rotational equation
of motion of the ball is
                                                          ~
                                                         dΩ
                                                     I       ~ I × F~ = RFk ẑ.
                                                            =R                                                          (6)
                                                         dt
As you can see from this equation, both the cue and the ball rotate around their own z-axis.
   To deal the collision between the cue and the ball, we need to consider the relative motion of the two impact points.
                                                       ~ +ω
The velocity of the impact point of the cue, Ccue , is U   ~ × ~rc and the velocity of the impact point of the ball, Cball ,
   ~   ~     ~
is V + Ω × RI . The relative velocity ~v between the impact point of the ball and that of the cue-tip can be obtained
by subtracting the former from the latter:
                                                              ~ −U
                                         ~v ≡ (vk , v⊥ , 0) = V  ~ −R
                                                                    ~I × Ω
                                                                         ~ + ~rc × ω
                                                                                   ~.                                   (7)

Conversely, the relative velocity of the cue-tip (Ccue ) with respect to the impact point of the ball is −~v and the cue-tip
will be contracted by the reaction force −F~ of the ball to the cue-tip. Because the cue-tip is more resilient than the
ball, the elastic phenomena happening during the collision are mainly due to the cue-tip.
  The change of the relative velocity, applying the equation of motions (3), (5), and (6), is described by

                                       d~v      ~
                                               dU    ~
                                                    dV           d~
                                                                  ω           ~
                                           = −    +    + ~rc ×      −R ~ I × dΩ
                                       dt      dt   dt           dt          dt
                                             1 ~ ~rc × (~rc × F~ ) R ~ I × (R
                                                                            ~ I × F~ )
                                           =   F−                 −                    .
                                             m          Ic                  I
Here, the mass parameter m is
                                                                  M Mc
                                                            m≡          .                                               (8)
                                                                 M + Mc

Using the vector relation ~rc × (~rc × F~ ) = −rc2 F~ + (~rc · F~ )~rc , we get

                                               mrc2       mRI2 ~ (~rc · F~ )~rc     ~ I · F~ )R
                                                                                              ~I
                                                                 
                               d~v      1                                          (R
                                    =       1+        +              F−          −               .                      (9)
                               dt      m         Ic         I                 Ic         I
                                                                                                                              4

  Let us write the amount of impulse that the cue acts on the ball for a short period dt along the direction parallel
to and perpendicular to the plane of impact to be

                                     dpk ≡ Fk dt = M dVk ,         dp⊥ ≡ F⊥ dt = M dV⊥ ,                                   (10)

respectively. Then, we write the equation of motion (9) for the relative velocity by means of the impulses:

                                          βk dpk − β× dp⊥                   −β× dpk + β⊥ dp⊥
                                  dvk =                   ,       dv⊥ =                      .                             (11)
                                                 m                                 m
In describing the collision process, we follow the construction of Stronge [14]. For notational convenience, we have
introduced three constants,
                                                sin φ cos φ
                                          β× =              ,
                                               νc (Q0 + 1)
                                                        Q0       cos2 φ
                                          βk = 1 +            +           ,
                                                    ν(Q0 + 1) νc (Q0 + 1)
                                                           sin2 φ
                                          β⊥ = 1 +                 .                                                       (12)
                                                       νc (Q0 + 1)

Here, Q0 = Mc /M and νc ≈ 0.136. These constants satisfy
                                                                                      2
                                                                                    β×
                                        βk , β⊥ > 0,       0 ≤ γ ≤ 1;         γ≡         .                                 (13)
                                                                                   βk β⊥

Because the friction force does not change its direction on the (x, z)-plane and the constant βk does not change, one
can sum Eq. (12) over the changes of the impacts dp⊥ and dpk .
   The impact p ≡ p⊥ orthogonal to the impact plane increases monotonically during the collision where F~ 6= 0.
Therefore, we describe the collision process by using this parameter instead of time. We omit the subscript ⊥ because
p will be used widely here.
   Let us write the initial values. The initial orthogonal impact p must be zero because there is no impact before the
cue-tip touches the ball. When the cue touches the ball, the velocities of the cue normal and parallel to the impact
plane are Ui cos φ and Ui sin φ, respectively. Before the collision, the ball is static. Therefore, the initial value of the
relative velocity ~v is

                                  v⊥ (0) = v⊥0 = −Ui cos φ,            vk (0) = vk0 = −Ui sin φ.                           (14)

  The velocity and the angular velocity change according to the equations (3) and (5), respectively. The changes of
the center of mass velocities of the cue and the ball satisfy

                          Mc dU⊥ = −dp⊥ ,        Mc dUk = −dpk ,       M dV⊥ = dp⊥ ,     M dVk = dpk .                     (15)

The angular velocities of the cue and the ball, according to the equation, follow equation,

                                   Ic dωz = rc (cos φ dpk − sin φ dp⊥ ),        IdΩz = Rdpk .                              (16)

Because the mass, the rotational inertia, the angle φ are independent of time, we can obtain the velocities once we
know the total impact after the collision.

                  III.   THE COLLISION PROCESS BETWEEN THE BALL AND THE CUE

  When we strike a ball off the center to give the ball a spin, first of all, the cue-tip starts to slide on the ball’s surface.
That is because the sliding velocity Ui sin φ cannot be made to zero instantly unless the friction force may not be
indefinitely large. Because of the normal force acting on the cue-tip, elastic energy accumulates as the tip contracts.
The parallel friction force between the tip and the ball reduces the sliding velocity. The slip disappears at a moment
while the cue-tip is contracting due to the frictional force. Later, the tip grips the ball and moves together. As we
know, the maximum static frictional force always equals to or is greater than the kinetic frictional force. Therefore,
once the slip disappears, an additional slip will not happen. At some point, the cue-tip contracts to its maximum, and
                                                                                                                         5

the elastic energy accumulated until then will restore the shape of the tip and pushes the ball out. By the end of the
contact period, the friction force is no longer enough to hold the ball firmly, so the ball bounces off the compressed
tip.
   In general, it is unclear which is first between the moment when the maximum compression happens and the
moment when the slip disappears. The order must be dependent on the initial values. In general collisions, we analyze
the maximum compression first case separately from the slip disappearance first case.
   In the case of the billiards, as we will see in V, the slip disappears almost instantaneously when the cue touches the
billiard ball. So in this work, we consider only the formal.
   Let us explain the collision process in the order of time.
   1. If the impact parameter b = R sin φ 6= 0 when the cue-tip touches the ball, it enters the slip state. The cue
      collides with the ball with a vertical velocity of Ui cos φ. At the same time it slides on the surface of the ball
      with a velocity Ui sin φ. Because the friction force is finite, the slip of the cue never stops instantaneously. The
      existence of the slip state is the origin of the squirt when striking off the center of the ball.
     If the kinetic friction coefficient is µ, the amount of friction force f on the ball is proportional to the magnitude
     of the normal force (= F⊥ ). So the amount of impulse parallel to the impact surface by the frictional force
     satisfies

                                                         dpk = µ dp⊥ .                                                (17)

     Here, the kinetic friction coefficient is assumed to be independent of the speed at which the cue slides and the
     vertical pressure, which holds when the sliding is not too fast on most surfaces. If the friction coefficient is large
     enough and the cue-miss does not happen, the sliding state will stop soon. Then, the cue and the ball will change
     to the ‘stick state’. Let the amount of the vertical impact at the moment of this change be p = ps . In other
     words, we mark the moment when slip stops and changes to ‘stick state’ as ps .
     During the slip, from the equation (11), the horizontal and the vertical components of the relative velocity are
                                 dvk   µβk − β×          dv⊥   −µβ× + β⊥
                                     =          ,            =           ,           0 ≤ p⊥ < ps .                    (18)
                                 dp⊥      m              dp⊥      m
     The initial value of vk is negative, because of Eq. (14). If we want the sliding speed |vk | to decrease, the kinetic
     friction must be large enough to satisfy dvk > 0, i.e.,

                                                                     β×
                                                        µ ≥ µc ≡        .                                             (19)
                                                                     βk

     In ordinary collisions, if the friction coefficient is not large enough, the slip can reverse its direction due to the
     frictional force. But there is no such phenomenon in the collision between the cue and a billiard ball if the
     friction coefficient is large enough to stop slip so that a cue-miss has not occurred. Then, the cue grabs the ball
     soon, i.e., vk (ps ) = 0. Integrating Eq. (18), the relative velocity at p = ps becomes
                                                                                            
                                                  µ        β× p s                           µγ β⊥ ps
                           0 = vk (ps ) = vk0 +      −1           ,   v⊥ (ps ) = v⊥0 + 1 −              .              (20)
                                                  µc        m                               µc     m
     At p = ps , we have vk = 0 and dvk = 0. Then, we can write the vertical impulse ps in terms of the the initial
     values and the kinetic friction coefficient:
                                                               −mvk0
                                                     ps =                 .                                           (21)
                                                            β× (µ/µc − 1)
     The vertical part of the relative velocity at this moment is
                                                                              
                                                             1 − γµ/µc µc
                                          v⊥ (ps ) = v⊥0 1 −              tan φ .                                     (22)
                                                              µ/µc − 1 γ

     Here, its initial value is v⊥0 = −Ui cos φ. The constants γ and µc are determined from Eqs. (13) and (19).
     The amount of the horizontal impulse, pk , delivered to the ball during the slip state, by using Eq. (17), is

                                                                    µmUi sin φ
                                                pk (ps ) = µps =                 .                                    (23)
                                                                   β× (µ/µc − 1)
                                                                                                                    6

  As expected, this amount is proportional to the cue’s horizontal velocity. It vanishes if the friction coefficient
  vanishes. In that case, the ball gets only the vertical velocity and will proceed in the y-direction, which is very
  different from the direction of the cue.
  The vertical relative speed may increase or decrease depending on the initial condition. Since we expect the ball
  to separate over time, we generally expect the vertical relative velocity to increase continuously, then satisfies
                                                    dv⊥ > 0 → µc > γµ.                                           (24)
  Combining this with Eq. (19), we obtain a constraint on the kinetic friction coefficient µ:
                                                      µ
                                                 1≤      < γ −1                                                  (25)
                                                      µc
  Under specific circumstances, this vertical relative speed may initially decrease. In this case, it is said that a
  ’jam’ occurred. When the ‘jam’ occurs, γ > µc /µ holds. At the moment the slip stops, the ’jam’ also ends.
  Under ordinary circumstances, if the sliding state ends during the compression of the cue-tip, dvk = 0 and
  v⊥0 < v⊥ (ps ) < 0 must be satisfied at p = ps . That is, the cue-tip is still undergoing compression at the time.
  Then, from Eqs. (21) and (22), the initial value must satisfy
                                                vk0           1 µ/µc − 1
                                                    = tan φ ≤                                                    (26)
                                                v⊥0           µc 1/γ − µ/µc
  if we want the sliding state stops during the compression undergoes. If this equation is not satisfied, the cue
  does not go into the ‘stick state’ during the compression process, but makes a cue-miss or becomes stuck during
  the restoration process. Conversely, this equation determines the lower bound for γ:
                                                                  −1
                                                     µ/µc − 1   µ
                                              γ≥              +         .                                    (27)
                                                     µc tan φ   µc

  Next, we find the energy used to compress the cue-tip while the cue slides on the ball. Suppose that the particle
  is moved by the displacement x along the direction of the force F~ from t = 0 to t = tf . Then, the work done by
  the force during this time is
                                     Z x         Z tf         Z pf
                                Wf =     F dx0 =      F vdt =      vdp,     dp = F dt.
                                        0               0            0

  If the normal velocity changes linearly with respect to the vertical impulse p, the work done by the force during
  pi < p < pj is
                                                Z pj
                                                            vj + vi
                                          W =        vdp =          (pj − pi )                                 (28)
                                                 pi            2
  where vi and vj are the corresponding values of normal velocity.
  From this equation, the energy absorbed by the cue-tip compression during the slip state, 0 ≤ p⊥ ≤ ps , is
                                                                           γµ β⊥ p2s
                                                                             
                                        (v⊥ (ps ) + v⊥0 )ps
                             W⊥ (ps ) =                     = v⊥0 ps + 1 −           .                       (29)
                                                  2                        µc   2m
  The energy absorbed in this way changes the shape of the cue-tip near the impact point and is saved as
  deformation energy of the cue-tip. At the later stage of the collision, the stored energy will be released into the
  forms of kinetic energy of the ball, heat, and sound.
2. After the slip has stopped p > ps , the stick state begins. Now, the impact point of the ball moves at the same
   speed as that of the cue horizontally. The cue-tip and the ball will stick together due to friction. Since the ball
   and cue tips are attached, there is no relative horizontal speed. Therefore, from the expression (11), we get
                                       dvk = 0        ⇒     dpk = µc dp,    p > ps .                             (30)

  From Eq. (11), the change of the normal relative velocity in the absence of slip is
                                                       β⊥ dp
                                              dv⊥ = (1 − γ)  ,      p > ps .                                     (31)
                                                         m
  Also, the horizontal impulse cumulated during this stick state is, by integrating Eq. (30),
                                            pk (p) = µps + µc (p − ps ),   p > ps .                              (32)
                                                                                                                    7

3. Because of the vertical velocity, the cue-tip continues to compress, accumulating energy. At the moment of
   maximal compression, the vertical compression stops v⊥ = 0. Let the amount of impulse at the moment be
   p = pc . Then, ps < pc because vertical compression stops when the tip and the ball are stuck. Integrating the
   expression in Eq. (31) from p = ps to p = pc and setting p = pc one gets

                                                                          β⊥ (pc − ps )
                                      0 = v⊥ (pc ) = v⊥ (ps ) + (1 − γ)                 .
                                                                               m

  Of course, the relative speed in the horizontal direction vanishes, vk (pc ) = 0, because they are stuck. During
  this additional compression period, from the above equation, an additional vertical impulse

                                                                   mv⊥ (ps )
                                                   pc − ps = −                                                   (33)
                                                                  (1 − γ)β⊥

  acts to the ball.
  Therefore, the amount of impulse up to the moment of maximum compression, in terms of the initial values
  using the equation (21), is

                                                      m(−v⊥0 )
                                               pc =             [1 + µc tan φ] .                                 (34)
                                                      (1 − γ)β⊥

  Here, tan φ = vk0 /v⊥0 . For later convenience, we write v⊥0 in terms of ps /pc ,

                                    −pc (1 − γ)β⊥     (1 − γ)β⊥ pc  µc tan φ        
                            v⊥0 =                   =                             −1
                                    m(1 + µc tan φ)        m         1 + µc tan φ
                                                      (1 − γ)β⊥ pc  γ(µ/µc − 1) ps    
                                                    =                                −1 .                        (35)
                                                           m            1−γ       pc

  By using Eq. (28), we get the energy cumulated by the normal force during the stick state, because v⊥ (pc ) = 0,
  to be
                                               v⊥ (pc ) + v⊥ (ps )                β⊥ (1 − γ)
                       W⊥ (pc ) − W⊥ (ps ) =                       (pc − ps ) = −            (pc − ps )2 .       (36)
                                                        2                             2m
  Summing this with the energy in Eq. (29), the total energy absorbed during the whole compression process
  including the ‘slip state’ is

                             W⊥ (pc ) = W⊥ (ps ) + [W⊥ (pc ) − W⊥ (ps )]
                                                      γµ  β⊥ p2s           β⊥ (pc − ps )2
                                      = v⊥0 ps + 1 −               − (1 − γ)
                                                       µc 2m                      2m
                                                        "                   2 #
                                                     2
                                          (1 − γ)β⊥ pc        (µ/µc − 1)γ ps
                                      = −                 1−                        .                            (37)
                                               2m                 1−γ        pc

  Here, we use Eq. (35) and

                                            ps       (1 − γ)µc tan φ
                                               =                           .                                     (38)
                                            pc   γ(µ/µc − 1)(1 + µc tan φ)

4. As soon as the vertical velocity of the cue becomes the same as that of the ball, the compression stops, and
   the restoration process begins. During this process, the shape of the cue-tip returns to its original form, and the
   elastic energy stored during the compression process is released to push the ball. Let’s call the terminal value
   of the vertical impulse obtained in the restoration process as pf and find the restored kinetic energy.
  Since vertical compression stops while the cue-tip and the ball are attached, ps < pc is satisfied. In this case,
  the tip and the ball remain attached until the ball is finally separated at p = pf . We integrate the equation (31)
  for pc ≤ p ≤ pf to get the terminal vertical relative velocity,

                                                            (1 − γ)β⊥
                                               v⊥ (pf ) =             (pf − pc ).                                (39)
                                                                m
                                                                                                                          8

      The terminal relative velocity parallel to the impact plane is vk (pf ) = 0 because it is in the stick state.
      The energy recovered in the restoration process from the elasticity of the cue-tip, by using Eq. (28), is

                                                   v⊥ (pf ) + v⊥ (pc )              (1 − γ)β⊥ p2c  pf   2
                           W⊥ (pf ) − W⊥ (pc ) =                       (pf − pc ) =                    −1 .            (40)
                                                            2                           2m          pc

      Also, the impulse in the horizontal direction cumulated from the initial slip state to the final restoration period
      is calculated from Eq. (32):
                                                                              
                                                                 µ    p
                                                                         s   pf
                                             pk (pf ) = µc pc       −1     +      .                                  (41)
                                                                 µc    pc    pc

   So far, we have looked into the collision process of the cue and the ball in detail. In describing the process, we
follow the construction of Stronge [14]. He defined the (energetic) coefficient of restitution (ECOR) from the ratio of
the elastic energy absorbed in the compression process to that recovered in the restoration process as

                                                             W⊥ (pf ) − W⊥ (pc )
                                                   e2∗ = −                       .                                     (42)
                                                                  W⊥ (pc )

Therefore, the ECOR, by using Eq. (37) and (40), is
                                                                  p
                                                                 ( pfc − 1)2
                                                   e2∗ =                           2 .                               (43)
                                                                    c −1)γ
                                                           1 − (µ/µ
                                                                  1−γ
                                                                               ps
                                                                               pc

From this result, we can find the ECOR once we know the initial values and pf .
  Conversely, given the ECOR, the ratio pf /pc can be found by arranging Eq. (43):
                                                  s                  2
                                     pf                 (µ/µc − 1)γ ps
                                         = 1 + e∗ 1 −                      .                                           (44)
                                     pc                    1−γ        pc

Here, since pf > pc , a positive radical was taken. In addition, from Eq. (39) for a given ECOR, the ratio of the vertical
velocity is

                                                           v⊥ (pf )
                                                                    = −e∗ G,                                           (45)
                                                            v⊥ (0)

where G is the modification factor of the COR determined by the initial value
                                                     s                    2
                                                           (µ/µc − 1)γ ps
                                   G ≡ (1 + µc tan φ) 1 −                     .                                        (46)
                                                              1−γ          pc

The impulse ps = 0 and vk0 = 0 if the cue strikes the center of the ball, which gives exactly the same result as the
existing Newtonian COR. However, if the impact parameter does not vanish and the cue does not strike the center of
the ball, the ECOR is different from the existing COR by the proportionality factpr G.

                     IV.     THE STATE OF THE CUE AND BALL AFTER THE IMPACT

  In this section, we determine the vertical relative velocity after the collision using a correctly defined ECOR.
  First, let’s put together several equations to find the relative speed after the impact. The initial value of the relative
velocity, as shown in Eq. (14), is vk (0) = −Ui sin φ, v⊥ (0) = −Ui cos φ. We find the ratio of impulses at each moments
by using the expressions (38), (46) and (44), to be

                                ps       (1 − γ)µc tan φ                     pf         e∗ G
                                   =                           ,                =1+              .                     (47)
                                pc   γ(µ/µc − 1)(1 + µc tan φ)               pc     1 + µc tan φ
                                                                                                                       9

In addition, the impulse pc at the moment of maximal contraction is
                                                                           mUi cos φ
                                      pc = p0 (1 + µc tan φ);       p0 ≡             .                              (48)
                                                                           (1 − γ)β⊥
  Putting these values to Eq. (46), we get
                                        s
                                                                 γ −1 − 1
                                     G=      (1 + µc tan φ)2 −            (µc tan φ)2 .                             (49)
                                                                 µ/µc − 1
                         2
Here µc = β× /βk , γ = (β× )/β⊥ βk = (βk /β⊥ )µ2c . In addition, a bound for γ is given from Eq. (27):
                                                              −1
                                              µ/µc − 1       µ
                                                         +          ≤ γ ≤ 1.                                        (50)
                                              µc tan φ      µc
If a ‘jam’ state does not happen, the upper limit of γ is reduced to µc /µ (< 1). However, the upper limit of γ is 1
because a ‘jam’ may occur in some situations.
   As you can see in the expression (49), the value of G behaves monotonically with respect to γ. Then, the range of
G for the bound (50) becomes
                                                  −1/2                            −1
                                       sin2 φ                            sin2 φ
                                                              
                             1−                         ≤G≤ 1−                         .
                                  (ν + 1)(Q0 + 1)                  (ν + 1)(Q0 + 1)
Therefore, the modification factor G is always greater than 1. In addition, both the upper and the lower bounds
increase monotonically with φ.
  Given G, we determine the terminal relative velocity after the impact from their initial values:
                                  v⊥ (pf ) = −e∗ Gv⊥0 = e∗ GUi cos φ,         vk (pf ) = 0.                         (51)
  To obtain the velocities of the cue and the ball, we calculate the terminal impulse parallel to the impact plane.
First, we put Eqs. (21), (33), (38), (44), (46) to Eq. (41). Then, we get
                                                                           
                                                                   µc tan φ
                                            pkf = µc p0 1 + e∗ G +            .                                (52)
                                                                       γ
  We get the velocity V~ 0 of the ball after the impact by dividing the terminal impulse the ball gets by the mass of the
ball, since the ball was static before the impact. In other words, V⊥0 = pf /M and Vk0 = pk (pf )/M . Using Eqs. (47),
(48), and(52), we get
                                         m Ui cos φ
                                    V⊥0 =            (1 + e∗ G + µc tan φ) ,
                                         M (1 − γ)β⊥
                                                                            
                                      0  m Ui cos φ                 µc tan φ
                                    Vk =             µc 1 + e∗ G +             .                                    (53)
                                         M (1 − γ)β⊥                    γ
Now, the kinetic energy of translation of the ball is
                                       2
                                                                                         2 
                       1     ~ 0 )2 = p0 (1 + e∗ G + µc tan φ)2 + µ2c 1 + e∗ G + µc tan φ
                                                                     
                         M (V                                                                  .
                       2              2M                                             γ
  To find the squirt angle of the ball, we call the angle between the velocity of the ball after the collision and the
y-axis θ. Then,
                                             Vk0            (γ −1 − 1)µc tan φ 
                                     tan θ = 0 = µc 1 +                           .                               (54)
                                             V⊥             1 + e∗ G + µc tan φ
Then, the squirt angle is
                                                       ψ = φ − θ.
The formula for this squirt angle can be easily identified by referring to the figure 3. In calculating the squirt angle,
we assumed that the cue is a rigid body. When the cue-ball mass ratio is about Mc /M ∼ 3 and the cue strikes half
the radius (ψ = 30o ≈ 0.523 rad.), the squirt angle is about 16o . This value is very different from the actual squirt
angle that appears in billiard games. However, we can find qualitative tendencies for the squirt angle. The squirt angle
vanishes when Q0 → 0 and φ = 0 and increases with φ and Q0 .
  Also, since the amount of squirt for a genuine cue is much smaller than this angle, we notice that the main
assumption we took in this section,“the cue behaves as if it is a rigid body” is incorrect. In the next section, we break
out the assumption and see how we can build a more physically acceptable cue model.
                                                                                                                               10

                            3.0

                                                                                                  22.5
                            2.5
                                                                                                  20.0

                            2.0                                                                   17.5

                                                                                                  15.0

                            1.5                                                                   12.5

                                                                                                  10.0
                            1.0
                                                                                                  7.5

                                                                                                  5.0
                            0.5

                                                                                                  2.5

                            0.0
                                  0.0        0.2            0.4            0.6            0.8

FIG. 2: The squirt angle for a rigid cue. The horizontal axis represents the angle φ and the vertical axis represents Q0 = Mc /M .
Typical values of e∗ = 3/4 and µ = 0.6 were used.

                            V.      THE FLEXIBILITY OF THE CUE AND THE IMPACT

                                        FIG. 3: The cue model and the squirt angle ψ.

   In the previous section, we dealt with the problem by regarding the cue as a rigid body. However, since the actual
cue consists of wood, it vibrates when a perpendicular impulse to the cue line works. Because of this, only an end
part of the cue immediately reacts to an impulse acting on the cue-tip for a very short duration such as the stroke on
a billiard ball. Later, the effect of the impulse will spread out. On the other hand, if the moment of striking the ball
is much longer than the period of the vibration, it is appropriate to approximate the cue as a rigid body.
                                                                                                                                      11

   When a cue strikes a billiard ball, the moment that the cue and the ball contact each other is about 0.002 seconds.
The vibrating frequency of the end part of the cue is about f = 250 Hz.2 Thus, we get a period of vibration to be
about 0.004 seconds. It takes less time than half a period to strike the billiard ball with the cue and there is not
enough time for the impact acted on the cue-tip to spread over the entire cue. The actual functioning of the billiard
cue, then, can be modeled by an end-part of the cue including the cue-tip (let’s call it ‘the cue-end’) as shown in
Fig. 3. When trying to make a shaft from any material, one needs to pay attention to its vibration frequency to obtain
better function.
   If we look at the super-slow-motion video [15], we can see the end of the cue that hit the billiard ball vibrates.
This swinging length is about ten times the diameter of the cue-tip3 . Since the cue-tip radius is about b = 6 mm, we
estimate the cue-end length to be about 12 cm. The radius of the opposite side of the shaft is about 10.5 mm, which
is thicker than the cue-tip. The length and the mass of the shaft are about 70 cm and 120 g, respectively. Therefore,
the mass of the cue-end (usually called end-mass) is approximately 1/10 of the mass of the shaft when calculated
using the volume ratio of the cone:
                                                              mc ≈ 12 g.                                                             (55)
Of course, this value depends on the type and the elasticity of cue. Summarizing, the cue-end is approximately 12 g,
has the shape of the bottom l = 12 cm of a cone of length 105.3 cm. The base radius of the cone is approximately
a = 6.77 mm. The volume of the cue-end is V = πl       2         2
                                                  3 (a + ab + b ). The center of mass is located at
                                            R
                                              ydV     l(a2 + 2ab + 3b2 )
                                       ȳ =        =                     ≈ 0.48l
                                              V         4(a2 + ab + b2 )
from the bottom roughly. Therefore, since the position of the center of mass is not significantly different from the
center position of the cue-end (0.5 l), we can regard the center of mass is located at the center without a large error.
Therefore, the rotational inertia of the cue-end, Ic , is
                                                                                 1
                                                    Ic = νc mc rc2 ;      νc ≈     .
                                                                                 3
Here, νc is obtained from the rotational inertia of a uniform rod and rc ≈ 0.5 l.
  The body (the other part of the cue than the cue-end) plays the role of acting a force (indicated as F~ 0 in the figure)
on the cue-end along the line of the cue. If necessary, you can also consider the effect of vibration of the cue-end. Of
course, because the strike ends before the cue-end performs one period of oscillation, one can treat it as a friction like
Cross [12] rather than an oscillation.
  We choose the coordinate system to be the same as that in the previous section. Let the speed of the body of the
       ~cue . If the central velocity of the cue-end is U
cue be V                                                ~ , we can express the velocity of the cue V
                                                                                                   ~cue to be the line-of-cue
part of the cue-end velocity:
                                                       ~ ~
                                     ~cue ≡ Vcue Ûi = U · Ui U
                                     V                        ~ i = (U⊥ cos φ + Uk sin φ)Ûi .                                       (56)
                                                        Ui2
Here Vcue (0) = Ui . Let the end-mass be mc . Then the mass of the body part other than the cue-end is Mc − mc and
the force of this body part acting on the cue-end is F~ 0 . The equation of motion for the body-part is
                                                                    ~cue
                                                                   dV
                                                     (Mc − mc )          = −F~ 0 .                                                   (57)
                                                                    dt
The equation of motion of the cue-end, because it receives F~ 0 from the body part and gives F~ to the ball, is
                                                               ~
                                                              dU
                                                         mc      = F~ 0 − F~ .                                                       (58)
                                                              dt
The ball of mass M gains force F~ from the cue-end. Therefore, the equation of motion of the ball is
                                                                   ~
                                                                  dV
                                                              M      = F~ .                                                          (59)
                                                                  dt

2 I have obtained this value by using a smartphone application ‘spectrum’ which measures the frequency of sound.
3 Of course, this is a very rough value. The length of the cue-end depends on the type of wood, the method of making the cue, etc.
                                                                                                                                12

  In order to describe the change of the cue-end velocity Ui according to the amount of impulse received by the ball,
we apply Eq. (56) to Eqs. (57) and (58) and get
                         mc + (Mc − mc ) cos2 φ dU⊥ + (Mc − mc ) cos φ sin φ dUk = −dp⊥ ,
                                                 

                          (Mc − mc ) cos φ sin φ dU⊥ + mc + (Mc − mc ) sin2 φ] dUk = −dpk .
                                                      
                                                                                                                (60)
Here dp⊥ and dpk are defined in Eq. (10). Rewriting the equation with respect to dU⊥ and dUk , we get

                                − mc + (Mc − mc ) sin2 φ]dp⊥ + (Mc − mc ) cos φ sin φ dpk
                                  
                       dU⊥ =                                                              ,
                                                           Mc mc
                                                             
                                (Mc − mc ) cos φ sin φ dp⊥ − mc + (Mc − mc ) cos2 φ]dpk
                        dUk =                                                           .                                     (61)
                                                          Mc mc
Using this result and Eq. (56), we get
                                                             cos φ dp⊥ + sin φ dpk
                                                 dVcue = −                         .
                                                                      Mc
Writing the velocity change of the cue-end as a component,
                                                      cos2 φ dp⊥ + cos φ sin φ dpk
                                           dVcue⊥ = −                              ,
                                                                   Mc
                                                      sin φ cos φ dp⊥ + sin2 φ dpk
                                           dVcuek = −                              .                                          (62)
                                                                   Mc
   Let us write the angular velocities of the cue-end and the ball ω     ~ respectively. Then, the rotational equation
                                                                   ~ and Ω,
of motion for the cue-end and the ball are
                                                d~
                                                 ω                          ~
                                                                           dΩ
                                           Ic      = ~rc × (−F~ ),     I       ~ I × F~ .
                                                                              =R                                              (63)
                                                dt                         dt
The force F~ 0 does not contribute to the rotational motion because this force always points toward the center of the
cue-end. The rotational inertia of the cue-end is Ic = νc mc rc2 . The relative velocity of the impact points between the
cue tip and the ball is also given by the result obtained in the previous section (7), and the change of this relative
velocity, by using Eqs. (57), (58), and (59), is

                           d~vrel      ~
                                      dU    ~
                                           dV           d~
                                                         ω           ~
                                  = −    +      + ~rc ×     ~ I × dΩ
                                                           −R
                             dt       dt   dt           dt         dt
                                                ~
                                    (Mc − mc ) dVcue     1    ~rc × (~rc × F~ ) R~ I × (R
                                                                                        ~ I × F~ )
                                  =                   + F~ −                   −                   .
                                        mc       dt     m            Ic                 I
Here, the mass m represent not the mass (8) in the previous section but is determined by the cue-end and the ball by
                                                                   M mc
                                                           m≡            .                                                    (64)
                                                                  M + mc
Using the vector relation ~rc × (~rc × F~ ) = −rc2 F~ + (~rc · F~ )~rc and Eq. (62), we remove F~ 0 in the equation. Then, we write
the change of the relative velocity dv⊥ and dvk by using the impulse (10) acting on the ball during a short period of
time dt:
                                           βk0 dpk − β×
                                                      0
                                                        dp⊥                    0
                                                                             −β×        0
                                                                                 dpk + β⊥ dp⊥
                                   dvk =                      ,      dv⊥ =                    .                               (65)
                                                    m                               m
Here, the constant βk0 with k =k, ⊥, × are
                                                  m cos2 φ 1
                                                                                   
                                             m                          mc 
                                   βk0 ≡ 1 +   +                − 1−          tan2 φ ,
                                           νM       mc       νc          Mc
                                                2                    2
                                                                       
                                    0      m cos φ       mc      tan φ
                                   β⊥ ≡ 1−           1−       −           ,
                                              mc         Mc        νc
                                                        
                                    0   m 1          mc
                                   β× ≡        +1−         cos φ sin φ.                                                       (66)
                                        mc νc        Mc
                                                                                                                         13

The constant βk0 can be obtained formally from βk defined in the previous section by adding a term considering the
cue-structure and still satisfies
                                                                              0 2
                                              0                           (β×   )
                                             β⊥ , βk0 ≥ 0,      γ=                ≤ 1.                                 (67)
                                                                          β⊥ βk0
                                                                            0

Here νc ≈ 1/3. In addition, because the mass of the cue-end is much smaller than that of the ball, we have m/mc =
(1 + mc /M )−1 ∼ 1 − mc /M .
   Since the friction force does not change direction in the (x, z) plane and the values of βk0 hardly change during the
collision, we can find the velocity ~v by integrating with respect to p⊥ and pk . The initial value of the relative velocity
of the impact point Cball of the ball to that of the cue is given by Eq. (14) as before. Now all the calculations done
in the previous sections will hold with the same form by replacing them with βk → βk0 .
   Therefore, after putting βk → βk0 in the result of the previous section, we calculate G, the modification factor of
COR, from (49),
                                            s
                                                                γ −1 − 1
                                       G = (1 + µc tan φ)2 −             (µc tan φ)2 .                                  (68)
                                                                µ/µc − 1

Of course the values of
                                                                     0
                                                                    β×
                                                             µc =                                                      (69)
                                                                    βk0

and γ satisfies the inequality in (50).
  Next, we write pf and pk ≡ pk (pf ) using the initial values. From Eq. (47), pf becomes

                                                                                     mUi cos φ
                                    pf = p0 (1 + e∗ G + µc tan φ),            p0 ≡           0 .                       (70)
                                                                                     (1 − γ)β⊥

In addition, from Eq. (52), we have
                                                                            
                                                                    µc tan φ
                                           pkf = µc p0 (1 + e∗ G) +            .                                       (71)
                                                                        γ

  The velocity of the ball after the collision is, from V⊥0 = pf /M, Vk0 = pk (pf )/M ,
                                                                                                   
                                p0                                        µ0 p0            µc tan φ
                          V⊥0 =    (1 + e∗ G + µc tan φ),           Vk0 =       1 + e∗ G +            .                (72)
                                M                                            M                 γ

Integrating Eq. (16) we get the rotational angular velocity of the ball,
                                                                        
                                        RΩ~ 0 = µc p0 1 + e∗ G + µc tan φ ẑ.                                          (73)
                                                νM                   γ

  After the impact, let the angle between the velocity of the ball and the y-axis be θ. Then, from Eq. (54),

                                                 Vk0            (γ −1 − 1)µc tan φ 
                                       tan θ =       = µc   1 +                       .                                (74)
                                                 V⊥0            1 + e∗ G + µc tan φ

The squirt angle, which is the angle of the ball after the impact deviates from the stroke direction of the ball is

                                                        ψ = φ − θf .                                                   (75)

   In the previous section, we find that the squirt angle is not proper when we assume the cue is a rigid body. Now,
let us see how the flexibility of the cue modifies the results.
   To consider the most dramatic situation first, let us observe the limit
                                                              mc
                                                        =       → 0,
                                                              M
                                                                                                                          14

i.e., the mass of the cue-end goes to zero. In the limit, using m/mc ≈ 1 − , and mc /Mc = /Q0 , one can easily get
                                                        1 + νc
                                              βk0 ≈ βk0 ≡      cos2 φ,
                                                          νc
                                               0        1 + νc
                                              β⊥    0
                                                 ≈ β⊥ ≡        sin2 φ,
                                                          νc
                                               0    0   1 + νc
                                              β× ≈ β× ≡        cos φ sin φ.                                             (76)
                                                          νc
Then,
                                                     µc → tan φ,     γ→1                                                (77)
and the modification factor G of COR becomes
                                                                 1
                                                         G→           .                                                 (78)
                                                               cos2 φ
The bound for the angle (50) simply gives φ < π4 = 45o . This restriction is meaningful because it contains the Coriolis’s
limit b/R = 0.7 < sin 45o ≈ 0.707. Putting these results to Eq. (74) which represents the direction of the ball after
the impact, we get tan θ = tan φ. Therefore, in this limit the squirt is absent:
                                                         ψ =φ−θ =0                                                      (79)
In other words, in the limit of zero-end-mass, the squirt disappears. To know the velocity of the ball after the impact,
                                                                                          0
let us examine Eq. (72). Then, we find that the absolute size of p0 = mUi cos φ/(1 − γ)β⊥    is ill-defined because both
the numerator and the denominator go to zero in the limit  → 0. Explicitly, m = M (1 + )−1 → 0 and γ → 1.
   Therefore, to find the zeroth order velocity of the ball, we need to know the results up to the first order in . The
mass of the ball is roughly M = 210 g which gives
                                                       mc   12     2
                                                ≡        ≈     =     1.
                                                       M    210   35
This justifies the perturbative calculation. Let us calculate the quantities to their first order to get the velocity. First,
we write βk0 to the first order of :

                                                                  νc (1 + ν)      νc tan2 φ
                             βk0 ≈ βk0 (1 − Ak );     Ak ≡ 1 −                 −             ,
                                                               ν(1 + νc ) cos2 φ Q0 (1 + νc )
                             0    0                                     νc        νc cot2 φ
                            β⊥ ≈ β⊥ (1 − A⊥ );        A⊥ ≡ 1 −              2  −             ,
                                                                (1 + νc ) sin φ Q0 (1 + νc )
                             0    0                                   νc
                            β× ≈ β× (1 − A× );        A× ≡ 1 +              .                                          (80)
                                                                (1 + νc )Q0
Here, Q0 = Mc /M represents the mass ratio between the cue and the ball. Putting these into Eqs. (69) and (67) we
get
                                                                                      
                                                                  νc         1   1+ν
                   µc ≈ tan φ [1 − (A× − Ak )] = tan φ 1 −                     +           ,
                                                            (1 + νc ) cos2 φ Q0     ν
and
                                                                              sin2 φ
                                                                                    
                                                νc        1             1
                                     γ ≈1−                           1 +    +          .
                                              1 + νc sin2 φ cos2 φ       Q0     ν
Putting these results to Eq. (74) to obtain the angle between the velocity of the ball and the y-axis, we find
                                                                                    
                                                 νc           1     1       1     e∗
                        tan θ ≈ tan φ 1 −                        +     +1+                 .                            (81)
                                           (1 + νc )(1 + e∗ ) ν      ν      Q0 cos2 φ
Therefore, the squirt angle ψ to the first order in , by using the formula ψ ≈ tan ψ = tan(φ − θ), becomes
                                                                                 
                                         νc sin φ cos φ   1     1       1     e∗
                              tan ψ ≈                        +     +1+                .                                 (82)
                                       (1 + νc )(1 + e∗ ) ν      ν       Q0 cos2 φ
                                                                                                                                        15

As you can see from this equation, the squirt angle depends on various factors. For example, νc is a value related to
the structure of the cue-end, ν is dependent on the mass distribution of the ball, and e∗ is the COR for the frontal
collision between the cue and the ball. Also, Q0 corresponds to the mass ratio between the cue and the ball. The
squirt angle decreases as this mass ratio increases. That is, the squirt angle decreases as the mass of the cue increases
with fixed end-mass. However, as can be seen by comparing with the number (1 + ν)/ν ∼ 7/2, if the mass ratio is
higher than a certain value (approximately Q0 ≥ 3), the effect of this mass ratio is not significant. On the other hand,
if the mass ratio decreases, this squirt angle can be noticeably increased, especially if the cue mass is less than that
of the ball. Finally, the squirt angle simply proportional to  = mc /M , the mass ratio between the cue-tip and the
ball. In the left panel of Fig. 4, we plot the squirt angle for several values of  for Q0 = 18/7 and e∗ = 3/4. It is

                                                                          ψ
ψ8                                                                        
                                                                         50

  6                                                                      40

                                                                         30
  4

                                                                         20

  2
                                                                         10

                      0.2            0.4              0.6            b           0.1      0.2      0.3      0.4      0.5      0.6     0.7 b
                                                                     R                                                                    R

FIG. 4: The squirt angle for a realistic model of cue. For the left panel, mc /M = 0, 2/35, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.7, 1.0 respectively
from the bottom. The solid red line corresponds to mc /M = 2/35. Here, we choose the typical values for COR, e∗ = 3/4, and
cue-ball mass ratio, Q0 = 18/7. For the right panel we plot ψ/ with respect to b/R for, Mc /M = 0.3, 1, 18/7, 5, respectively
from the top.

obvious that the squirt angle is proportional to , the mass ratio between the ball and the cue-end. In addition, one
can notice that the squirt angle increases almost linearly for small impact parameter b. For larger impact parameter
b ∼ .5, non-linear behaviors just appears.
   For a well-made cue, (mc /M < 0.1), if the impact parameter is less than 0.55R, the squirt angle is less than 1
degree. With a squirt angle of 1 degree, in the case of the carom billiards table, an error of approximately 49.6 mm
occurs when we strike the ball from one end to the other end in the long axis direction. Since the radius of the billiard
ball is about 36.9 mm, this makes an error of about 5/8 thickness. In playing billiards, personal cues are especially
meaningful because the player notices this squirt angle of his own cue.
   In 2001, Ron Shepard [11] calculated the squirt angle by using the law of momentum conservation after assuming
that the terminal velocity of the cue-end is the same as the terminal velocity of the impact point4 . If this assumption
is correct, we can write the squirt angle in an easier form,
                                                          b
                                                            p
                                                         νR   1 − (b/R)2
                                              tan ψ ≈                      .
                                                       1 + 1/ + (b/R)2 /ν

This formula presents a result similar to that in Fig. 4 obtained in this work qualitatively regarding the mass-ratio
between the cue-end and the ball. However, it gives very different numerical values. For example, if  = 0.1, this
formula gives the squirt angle of 4.38o , but the formula in Eq. (82) gives a squirt angle smaller than 1o .
   The present work allows to take into account the effect of the cue-ball mass ratio, the effect of the change of the
elasticity, and the effect of the structural change of the cue-tip on the squirt angle.

4 If one can ignore the rotational motion of the cue tip, the translational velocity of the cue-end and the final speed of the impact point

  will be the same.
                                                                                                                        16

          VI.   SUMMARY: THE STATE OF THE BALL AND THE CUE AFTER THE IMPACT

   In this work, we have studied the impact of a cue on a billiard ball. Respecting the flexibility of a cue, the cue is
modeled to be composed of two parts: the body and the cue-end. The cue-end is the short ‘end-part of the cue’ which
responses to the impact from the ball instantly. The mass of the cue-end is much lighter than the mass of the ball. We
find that the squirt angle is suppressed to O() where  = mc /M , the mass ratio between the cue-end and the ball.
The squirt angle increases with the impact parameter b = R sin φ, where R denotes the radius of the ball. For small
b  R, it increases linearly. For b ∼ R/2, non-linear behavior start to appear, which can be seen in the experimental
data in [12].
   Before finishing this work, we summarize the motion of the ball struck by the cue with the impact parameter
b = R sin φ. This is very important for the stroke of the billiard ball but I cannot find the results in the literature. We
strike the cue horizontally on the height of the center of the ball. Because the squirt angle is very small we may use
the approximation   1 and write the velocity only to the first non-vanishing order, from Eq. (70),

                                              p0         Ui cos3 φ
                                                 ≈                         .
                                              M    (1 + Q−1
                                                         0 )+ν
                                                                 −1 sin2 φ

Then, the translational velocity of the ball, by using Eqs. (77), (78), is

                                             ~0 =         1 + e∗         ~ i.
                                             V           −1              U                                            (83)
                                                    1 + Q0 + ν −1 sin2 φ
      ~ i denotes the speed of the cue before the impact. Therefore, most importantly, the velocity of the ball increases
Here, U
with the initial velocity of the cue. The velocity is maximized at φ = 0. The rotational velocity of the ball is

                                          ~0 =   Ui sin φ       1 + e∗
                                         RΩ                    −1              ẑ.                                    (84)
                                                    ν     1 + Q0 + ν −1 sin2 φ

The magnitude of this angular velocity satisfies R|Ω| = Vk /ν. Note that the size of this angular velocity takes its
maximum value
                                                         Ui 1 + e∗
                                               RΩ0 max = √ q                                                          (85)
                                                        2 ν 1 + Q−1
                                                                         0

at
                                                         q
                                                 sin φM = ν(1 + Q−1
                                                                 0 ).

As the mass ratio Q0 increases, the angle φM where the angular velocity takes its maximum decreases. However, for
an ordinary cue-ball mass ratio such as Q0 = 18/6 or Q0 = 3, the angle becomes sin φM = 0.745 or sin φM = 0.730,
respectively. Both are located outside of the bound of the impact parameter b = R sin φM > bmax = 0.7R. Therefore,
within thepbound of φ, the angular velocity increases with φ. If the cue is massive so that Q−1        0    1, we have
sin φM = 2/5 ∼ 0.632. In this case, the impact parameter corresponding to φM is located within the range of the
bound b = 0.7R. Therefore, one may find that the angular velocity achieved by the stroke decreases with φ > φM .
   This relation holds generally for every stroke performed horizontally if an artificial change of force from the hand
is absent. The angular velocity (84) is obtained by striking the cue on a position with the same height as the ball’s
center. If the cue mass is minute, one can find that both the translational velocity and the spin of the ball are small.
On the other hand, for a higher cue mass, a faster translational speed and spin are achieved, even though they cannot
increase indefinitely. An interesting observation is that the rotational angular velocity thus obtained never depends
on the magnitude of the friction coefficient between the cue and the ball. In other words, the friction coefficient
determines only the limiting value that prevents the cue-miss.
                                                                                                   ~ I = (h, y, `−R) with
   Let us find the rotational angular velocity when a cue strikes the location of the impact point R
the impact parameter b. The simplest way to do this job is i) to rewrite the above rotational angular velocity by using
the impact parameter, the vector from the center of the ball toward the impact point, and the vector representing the
direction of the cue stroke, and then ii) generalize the equation. This is possible because the period the cue strikes
the ball is so short that neither gravity nor the friction between the ball and the table plays a role. First, the impact
parameter satisfies
                                             p                          p
                                         b = h2 + (` − R)2 ,       y = R 2 − b2
                                                                                                                        17

At the present case of the previous section, ` = R, h = b.
  Let the unit vector along the impact direction of the cue be V̂cue . Then, the rotational direction of the ball can be
written as
                                                               ~ I × V̂cue
                                                               R
                                                        ẑ =               .
                                                                    b
  The total kinetic energy of the ball, summing the kinetic translational energy and the rotational energy, is
                                                                               2 
                                        M Ui2                                              sin2 φ
                                                                                                   
                                                          1 + e∗
                                  K=                     −1                           1+                .
                                         2          1 + Q0 + ν −1 sin2 φ                     ν

The kinetic energy of the ball monotonically decreases with φ. Therefore, the efficiency of kinetic energy transferal
from the cue to the ball happens only when the head-on collision. R
                                                        ~cue = U
   The velocity of the cue, by integrating Eq. (62), is V      ~ i + dV
                                                                      ~cue . The direction of V
                                                                                              ~cue is always parallel to
~
Ui . Then, the speed of the cue after the collision becomes

                           f          cos φ p⊥ + sin φ pk
                         Vcue = Ui −
                                               Mc
                                                                                         
                                      p0                                          µc tan φ
                               = Ui −       (1 + e∗ G + µc tan φ) + µc 1 + e∗ G +
                                      Mc                                              γ
                                                                  
                                         (cos φ + sin φ) (1 + e∗ )
                               = Ui 1 −                              .                                                (86)
                                         (1 + Q−1
                                                0 )+ν
                                                        −1 sin2 φ

  The angular velocity of the cue-end can be obtained by integrating Eq. (16). Using Eq. (70) and (71), we get
                           rc
                     ωz =     (cos φ pk − sin φ p⊥ )
                           Ic
                                  Ui cos2 φ
                                                                                        µ           
                                                                                            c
                         =                       0   (1 + e ∗ G)(µc − tan  φ) + µc tan φ      − tan φ
                           (1 + )νc rc (1 − γ)β⊥                                         γ
                                                                                       
                                                   e∗       1        1                  1
                             Ui cos φ sin φ (1 + cos2 φ ) Q0 + 1 + ν − tan φ 1 + Q0
                         ≈ −                                             2                  .                         (87)
                               (1 + νc )rc                   1 + 1 + sin φ
                                                                     Q0        ν

The rotational velocity increases with φ even though its direction is along the negative direction of ẑ. What is important
here is that the angular velocity of the cue-end is finite. Therefore, the rotational energy of the cue-end, in the  → 0
limit, goes to zero:

                                                Ecue−end,rotation = Ic ωz2 → 0.

It should be noted that this rotational angular velocity represents the rotation of the cue-end rather than the rotation
of the cue itself.
   In this calculation, the squirt was considered to be very small. Of course, when striking the ball to send it a distant
target, even a small squirt angle of 0.5o creates an error of about half a ball, which we cannot ignore. The squirt angle
of the ball is very small, so we do not write it down. Please refer the formula (82) or Fig. 4.
   Consider the case that a player holds a cue tightly when he strikes a billiard ball. He does not apply extra-force at
the instance of the cue striking the ball. Because the arm moves with the cue, this is equivalent to an effective increase
of the cue’s mass, which makes the parameter Q0 increase. Then, from Eqs. (82), (83), and (84), the velocity and the
angular velocity of the ball after the impact increase but the squirt angle tends to decrease even though this effect is
not significant. As Q0 increases, the maximum angular velocity in Eq. (85) also increases. In addition, the maximum
value of the angular velocity can be achieved for smaller impact parameter.
                                                                                                                                18

                                                       Acknowledgment

 This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea grants funded by the Korea government
NRF-2020R1A2C1009313. The author thanks to Youngone Lee for helpful discussions.

 [1] Coriolis, “Théorie mathématique des effets du jeu de billard,” (1835); “Mathematical Theory of Spin, Friction, and Collision
     in the Game of Billiards”, English translation, by David Nadler, ISBN: 0-9771671=0-0 (2005).
 [2] A. D. Moore, “Mechanics of Billiards, and Analysis of Willie Hoppe’s Stroke,” (1942).
 [3] R. Evan Wallace and Michael C. Schroeder, “Analysis of billiard ball collisions in two dimensions,” Am. J. Phys. 56, 815
     (1988); doi:10.1119/1.15455 .
 [4] S. C. Crown, “Modeling the Effects of Velocity, Spin, Frictional Coefficient, and Impact Angle on Deflection Angle in
     Near-elastic Collisions of Phenolic Resin Spheres,”
 [5] Inhwan Han, “Dynamics in Carom and Three Cushion Billiards,” Journal of Mechanical Science and Technology 19, 976
     (2005).
 [6] MATHAVAN, S., JACKSON, M.R. and PARKIN, R.M., “Application of high-speed imaging to determine the dynamics
     of billiards,” Am. J. Phys. 77 (9), 788 (2009). doi:10.1119/1.3157159.
 [7] MATHAVAN, S., JACKSON, M.R. and PARKIN, R.M., “A theoretical analysis of billiard ball dynamics under cushion
     impacts,” Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part C: Journal of Mechanical Engineering Science, 224
     (9), pp.1863 - 1873 (2010).
 [8] T. Nierhoff, K. Heunisch and S. Hirche, ”Strategic play for a pool-playing robot,” 2012 IEEE Workshop on Advanced
     Robotics and its Social Impacts (ARSO), Munich, Germany, 2012, pp. 72-78, doi: 10.1109/ARSO.2012.6213402; T. Nierhoff,
     K. Leibrandt, T. Lorenz and S. Hirche, ”Robotic Billiards: Understanding Humans in Order to Counter Them,” in IEEE
     Transactions on Cybernetics, 46, no. 8, pp. 1889-1899, Aug. 2016, doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2015.2457404.
 [9] D. Alciatore, TP2-1, https://billiards.colostate.edu/
[10] See, for example, <billiards.colostate.edu> and <www.sfbilliards.com/articles/BD-articles.html>.
[11] Ron Shepard, ”Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Cue Ball Squirt, But Were Afraid to Ask,”
     <www.sfbilliards.com/Shepard-squirt.pdf> or <billiards.colostate.edu>, (2001).
[12] R. Cross, “Cue and ball deflection (or “squirt”) in billiards”, Am. J. Phys. 76, 205 (2008); doi: 10.1119/1.2825392.
[13] R. Cross, “Grip-slip behavior of a bouncing ball”, American Journal of Physics, 70 (11), 1093, (2002);
     doi:10.1119/1.1507792.
[14] Stronge, W. (2018). Impact Mechanics (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/9781139050227
[15] “Amazing BILLIARDS PHYSICS in Super Slow Motion”, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NWkX9JCWCK0 (2021).
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/movement_variability_of_professional_pool_billiards_players_on_selected_tasks.pdf
title: Movement Variability of Professional Pool Billiards Players on Selected Tasks
topics: collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

                                                         ScienceDirect
                                                  Procedia Engineering 112 (2015) 540 – 545

                              7th Asia-Pacific Congress on Sports Technology, APCST 2015

            Movement variability of professional pool billiards players on
                                   selected tasks
         Philipp Kornfeinda*, Arnold Bacaa, Thomas Boindla, Andreas Kettlgrubera and Gerald
                                             Gollnhuberb
                                           a
                                               Faculty of Sport Science, University of Vienna, 1150 Vienna, Austria
                                                     b
                                                       Austrian Pool-Billard Association, Carinthia, Austria

   Abstract

   Parameter values characterizing the motion of the cue during impact in pool billiards have been determined for selected shots. 20
   elite players performed 18 predefined tasks comprising follow, draw, stop shots and breaks. 3D-kinematics were obtained using a
   motion analysis system comprising 8 cameras operating at 250 Hz and a high speed camera capturing with 5000 Hz.
   Longitudinal accelerations of the cue stick were recorded with 5 kHz using an accelerometer, mounted on the butt cap of the cue.
   Coefficients of variation for the parameter values obtained range from 3.9 % (height of impact point of maximum follow shot) to
   58.3 % (elevation angle of 10-ball break). The average cue stick motion is basically non-accelerated (-0.060 +/- 0.508 ms-2) at
   ball impact for all of the tasks except for the breaks (3.918 +/- 0.164 ms-2). Despite the high number of DOF in the input
   configuration the tested pool billiard players achieved very similar outcomes.
   © 2015
   ©   2015Published
              The Authors.    Published
                      by Elsevier           byanElsevier
                                  Ltd. This is            Ltd.
                                                 open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
   Peer-review under responsibility of the School of Aerospace, Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, RMIT University.
   (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
   Peer-review under responsibility of the the School of Aerospace, Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, RMIT University
   Keywords: Biomechanics; motion analysis; normative profile

   1. Introduction

      The physics behind the game of billiards is well understood [1]. Biomechanical aspects have, however, rarely
   been considered. In pool billiards, where the focus of this particular study has been set, the object of the game is to

     *
         Corresponding author.
         E-mail address: philipp.kornfeind@univie.ac.at

1877-7058 © 2015 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Peer-review under responsibility of the the School of Aerospace, Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, RMIT University
doi:10.1016/j.proeng.2015.07.240
                                    Philipp Kornfeind et al. / Procedia Engineering 112 (2015) 540 – 545                                       541

strike the white cue ball into the colored balls and then subsequently pocket them. Successful pool billiard players
are required to have efficient fine motor skills coupled with excellent repeatability in order to handle the different
challenges on the table [2]. When performing identically tasks, international top players show recognizable inter-
individual differences in their playing technique. These variations are notably related to the range of motion and the
sequence of segment movements, which lead to the question about the existence of a common playing technique.
Hence, the knowledge of subject independent movement parameters determining a successful shot technique is of
interest in order to derive general principles for coaches and youth players. It may be hypothesized that individual
movement strategies are necessary to compensate differences in anthropometrics and physiological properties.
    Moreover, it may be assumed that due to the physical principles governing the impact between cue stick and ball,
top elite players show a similar resulting motion of the cue stick at impact. To the best knowledge of the authors,
kinematic data describing this motion have not been published so far. The objective of the study described within
this paper, which has been performed as part of a larger research project, is to examine this expectation.

2. Methods

    All measurements were done during an international tournament in St. Johann (Austria Open, Salzburg,
Austria).A group of 20 top elite players (height: 180.2 ± 6.7 cm, mass: 80.3 ± 13.5 kg), all of them ranked under the
top 80 of the Euro-tour of the European Pocket Billiard Federation, 5 of them former world champions, performed
18 predefined tasks (A-R) comprising follow (A-F), draw (G-L), stop shots (M-N) and breaks (O-R). A follow shot
is (normally) done by hitting the cue ball above center. The cue ball stops momentarily then follows the object ball's
direction upon contact with the object ball. In a draw shot the cue ball stops momentarily then draws away from the
object ball towards the player upon contact with the object ball. A stop shot occurs when the cue ball comes to a
direct stop after making square contact with the object ball. The break shot is the first shot, which is used to separate
the object balls which have been racked together.
    Each predefined position of the balls has been previously marked on the table’s cloth to guarantee identical
conditions for all participants (see Figures 1-6).

Fig. 1. Short follow shot. A: Follow 2 diamonds. B: Follow 6               Fig. 2. Long follow shot. D: Follow 2 diamonds (player is allowed
diamonds (including one rail).                                             to touch the rail. E: Follow 4 diamonds (including one rail).

Fig. 3. Short draw shot. G: Draw 2 diamonds. H: Draw 4                     Fig. 4. Long draw shot. J: Draw 1 diamond. K: Draw 3-4
diamonds (player is allowed to touch the rail).                            diamonds.
542                                            Philipp Kornfeind et al. / Procedia Engineering 112 (2015) 540 – 545

      Fig. 5. Stop shot. M: Stop over 2 diamonds. N: Stop over 4                 Fig. 6. 10-ball break. O: From the middle (breaker). P: From the
      diamonds. Tolerance is a ball movement of 0.5 cm.                          left wing (breaker). Q: From the left wing (house cue). R: From
                                                                                 the middle (house cue). Maximum power with a straight hit.

         All players had to succeed in one given task within up to three attempts and were allowed to use their own sports
      equipment (shooting cue, break cue). 3D-kinematics were captured at 250 Hz using a motion analysis system
      comprising 8 cameras (Vicon, Oxford). Longitudinal accelerations of the cue stick were recorded with 5 kHz using
      an accelerometer, mounted on the butt cap of the cue. In addition, video imaging of the cue tip and the cue ball were
      done at 5000 Hz with a high speed camera (IDT, Tallahassee) positioned perpendicular to the shot direction.

         The following parameters were analyzed:

         1. vimpact…Velocity of the cue at ball impact
         2. φimpact…Elevation angle of the cue at ball impact
         3. himpact…Height of impact point
         4. timpact…Contact time between cue and ball during impact
         5. aimpa…Acceleration of the cue at ball impact

         vimp is defined as the 3D-velocity of a marker point attached near the top of the cue, himp is the height of the first
      contact point between cue and ball, aimp as the acceleration into the longitudinal direction of the cue at impact. vimpact,
      φimpact and himpact were determined using the motion analysis system, timpact from the high speed video recordings and
      aimpact from the accelerometer data. It was assumed that all parameters follow a normal distribution. In order to find
      out, if there is evidence against this assumption Shapiro-Wilk tests were performed (significance level: 0.05). Mean
      values, standard deviations and coefficients of variation were calculated.
         IBM SPSS (ver. 21) was used to test for normal distribution.

      3. Results

         Mean values and standard deviations (SD) for all parameters and shot types are depicted in Figures 7 to 11.
      Coefficients of variation (CV) are given for the ratio-scaled variables (all but aimpact) and are written into the
      respective bars. The asterisk (*) indicates a significant difference to normal distribution.
         Philipp Kornfeind et al. / Procedia Engineering 112 (2015) 540 – 545                              543

                                    Fig. 7. Cue velocity at impact.

                                Fig. 8. Cue elevation angle at impact.

Fig. 9. Height of impact point. The horizontal line indicates the vertical central line of the cue ball.
544                                  Philipp Kornfeind et al. / Procedia Engineering 112 (2015) 540 – 545

                                            Fig. 10. Contact time between cue and ball.

                                                Fig. 11. Cue acceleration at impact.

     It should be noted that the accuracy of the contact time is limited by the temporal resolution of the recording high
  speed camera (5000 Hz).
     CV for vimpact were lowest (8 % on average) whilst largest CV values were observed for φimpact (33 % on average).
  For himpact CV was 9 % on average. The lowest timpact values were observed for the breaks. This well corresponds to
  the highest vimpact values. The mean CV for timpact for all types of shots was 21 %. The average cue stick motion was
  basically non-accelerated (-0.060 +/- 0.508 ms-2) at ball impact for all of the tasks except for the breaks (3.918 +/-
  0.164 ms-2).

  4. Discussion

     Because of the high skill level of the participants, the collected data may serve as a reference for coaches and
  athletes as well as for future studies. Main differences between the parameter values characterizing the shot types
  can well be inferred from Figures 7 to 11. Short follow shots, for example, show larger values for himpact than long
  follow shots, short draw shots lower values for vimpact than long draw shots and draw shots lower values for himpact
                                     Philipp Kornfeind et al. / Procedia Engineering 112 (2015) 540 – 545                                          545

than follow shots. These differences follow physical principles of the tasks to be performed and will not be
discussed in more detail, here.
    The values of vimpact for maximum follow and draw shots were almost identical (~4.5 m/s). Also himpact showed
quite similar values for all types of draw shots (~17.4 mm). The occurrence of these values may be caused by
physical boundary conditions during the interaction between cue stick and ball (e.g. static friction). Higher cue stick
velocities or lower vertical impact positions on the cue ball may result in a bad shot and are probably limiting factors
in pool billiards.
   The distribution of timpact significantly differs from a normal distribution in almost all cases. This may partly be
reasoned by the insufficient timely resolution of the high-speed system used for recording the motions. Respective
results have therefore to be interpreted with care. Different properties of the material used for the cues’ tip might
also have influenced these results.
   Significant deviations to the normal distribution of aimpact were mainly caused by one outlier. Whereas players
basically hit the ball with a non-accelerated cue stick for all the tasks but the breaks, one player showed a different
behavior in accelerating the cue before impact. aimpact was negative in most cases revealing a deceleration before
impact. Nevertheless, a non-accelerated motion of the cue stick during impact is clearly prevalent. Comparable
observations have been made for hitting devices in other sports, e.g. in tennis [3].
   Concerning inter-individual variability of the players, vimpact and himpact show average CVs below 10 %. Although
CV for φimpact is comparatively high, the mean SD of this parameter for all types of shots is 1.2 deg. The distributions
of himpact and φimpact do not significantly differ from normal distributions for all types of shots, those of vimpact only in
cases, where SD is very small (see Figure 7). It may therefore be concluded that top elite players do not basically
differ in their cue stick motion at impact. The mean values of vimpact, himpact and φimpact might well characterize the
playing behavior of top elite players.

5. Conclusion

   Despite the high number of DOF in the input configuration the tested pool billiard players achieved very similar
outcomes even though individual players selected a different strategy for some tasks.

References

[1] J. Jankunas, R.N. Zare, Why some pool shots are more difficult than others, Resonance 19(2) (2014) 116-122.
[2] P. Kornfeind, A. Baca, D. Kuzdas, G. Gollnhuber, M. Neumann, Investigation of subject independent movement parameters in professional
    pool billiard, in: A. De Haan, C.J. De Ruiter, E. Tsolakidis (Eds.), Book of Abstracts of the 19th Annual Congress of the European College
    of Sport Science, 2014, p. 81.
[3] H. Hatze, Forces and duration of impact, and grip tightness during the tennis stroke, Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 8 (1976),
    88-95.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/new_pool_rules.pdf
title: New Pool Rules
topics: technical_proofs, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“New Pool Rules!”                                                             ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at drdavepoolinfo.com. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    As Bob Jewett mentioned in a recent column, the World Pool Association (WPA) updated the official rules
of pool for the first time in about 10 years! I recently posted an online video (NV L.91) that summarizes the
major changes and shows game situation examples affected by the changes. I’ll share some of these examples
below.

    In the past, you were not allowed to lay your cue on the table for aiming and aligning purposes without
having at least one hand in contact. This rule has now been relaxed. As shown in Image 1, there is nothing
wrong with releasing the cue. The new rules now explicitly allow you to use your cue and any part of your body
to aim and plan shots. Although, as demonstrated in the video, you are not allowed to mark the cloth with a
chalked tip, so be careful how you handle the cue when the tip in contact with the cloth. It is also illegal to place
a chalk or anything else on the rail as an aiming target.

                     Image 1 Cue on the table for aiming and aligning is now allowed

     When using a mechanical bridge, the rules now make it clear that the cue must be supported by the head
of the bridge. You are not allowed to use a hand bridge on top of the mechanical bridge head as shown in
Image 2a. You are also not allowed to support a hand bridge on the handle of the mechanical bridge as shown
in Image 2b. You are allowed to use two mechanical bridges, but the 2nd bridge must be supported by the head
of the 1st bridge, and the cue must be supported by the head of the 2nd bridge.

Billiards Digest                                       1                                              September 2025
                   a) hand bridge on head                               b) hand bridge on handle

                                 Image 2 Illegal uses of the mechanical bridge

    There are several rule clarifications concerning balls settling at the end of a shot. If a ball comes to rest
close to the edge of a pocket, you must wait 5 seconds before shooting the next shot. If the ball falls during
these 5 seconds, it is considered pocketed. If the ball falls after 5 seconds, it must be replaced as close as
possible to the original location. Also, the rules now clearly state that if a ball is supported beyond the edge of
the pocket, where it would fall into the pocket if supporting balls were removed, the ball should be pocketed.
For example, the two balls in Image 3a are jammed in the back of the pocket opening. Because removing
either ball will let the other ball fall, both balls should be pocketed. Image 3b shows another example where
because there are so many balls in the pocket already, the 8 is being supported. But again, if the ball is hanging
over the edge of the pocket and drops when supported balls are removed, the ball is considered pocketed.
Obviously, balls should not be allowed to stack this high in a pocket; but if it happens, it is now clear what to
do.

             a) balls jammed in back of a pocket                b) a ball supported by balls in a full pocket

                   Image 3 Balls supported beyond the pocket edge are considered pocketed

Billiards Digest                                      2                                              September 2025
     The new rules make it crystal clear that if a foul call is uncertain, the benefit of the doubt always goes to the
shooter. An example where this comes up is in determining whether a legal ball is hit first when there is a
nearby obstacle ball. Image 4 shows an interesting example of this, where the ball lines are perpendicular
relative to a split-hit cue ball (CB) position. As demonstrated in the video, with a legal hit of the 8 first, the CB
stops in place. And with an illegal hit of the 13 first, the CB also stops in place. Obviously, if you do not have
slow-motion video replay, it can sometimes be extremely difficult to tell for certain which ball was hit first. In
situations in this, it must be assumed that the 8 was hit first legally. And even when slow-motion replay is
available, it still might be impossible to tell which ball was hit first since a lot can happen between the available
frames of video. If it is not certain an illegal ball is hit first, the benefit of the doubt goes to the shooter and a
legal shot is assumed.

                   Image 4 Benefit of doubt of split hit uncertainty goes to the shooter

     Another type of shot where clarifications were added to the rules are unintentional miscue scoops, where
the CB leaves the playing surface. When a scoop is the result of an unintentional miscue during an attempted
draw shot, the new rules specifically make it clear that these shots are not fouls, unless there is some other
infraction. The video shows two examples from recent pro tournaments where the previous rules were not
interpreted correctly, partly because the old rules were not clear or complete enough on this matter. These bad
calls should not occur in the future.

     In the previous rules, there was a regulation that allowed CB fouls only when referees were not available.
This is common in league systems where players are not penalized for touching or moving an OB by mistake
before, during, or after a shot. In these leagues, the opponent has the option to return moved balls to their
previous locations after the inadvertent move. CB-fouls-only is no longer an option in the new WPA official
rules of pool. Therefore, except when you have ball in hand, where you are allowed to place the CB without
touching any other balls, you are never allowed to touch or move any ball with anything except using the cue
tip with a single hit during a legal shot. In general, league systems should follow the official rules of pool, but
this is one rule they might find challenging to embrace.

   There are also new rules and regulations concerning the 9-ball break, 10-ball safeties, bank pool, one
pocket, doubles play, racking, player-refereeing, and parasports events, so be sure to check out online video
NV L.91 for more information and examples. The video also demonstrates everything in this article and much

Billiards Digest                                        3                                              September 2025
more. If you want to learn more about the new WPA official rules of pool, check out the links in the YouTube
video description or on the “pool rules” and “fouls” resource pages at drdavepoolinfo.com.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV L.91 – New WPA Official Rules of Pool … Learn About All the Changes
   normal video

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at drdavepoolinfo.com.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                         4                                              September 2025
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/non_smooth_modelling_of_billiard_and_superbilliard_ball_collisions.pdf
title: Non Smooth Modelling Of Billiard And Superbilliard Ball Collisions
topics: collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
ARTICLE IN PRESS

                                       International Journal of Mechanical Sciences 50 (2008) 752–763
                                                                                                                      www.elsevier.com/locate/ijmecsci

    Non-smooth modelling of billiard- and superbilliard-ball collisions
                                                            Antonio Doménech
                    Department of Analytical Chemistry, University of Valencia, Dr. Moliner, 50, 46100 Burjassot (València), Spain
                           Received 11 June 2007; received in revised form 9 November 2007; accepted 18 November 2007
                                                        Available online 22 November 2007

Abstract

   A description of billiard-ball collisions using a ‘discontinuous’ model is presented considering a two-step situation corresponding to
the ball–ball interaction followed by ball-supporting surface interaction. It is applied to the inelastic impact of a cue ball having arbitrary
pivotment and ‘English’ spins against an object ball initially at rest. This formulation provides a simpliﬁed approximation to the
‘continuous’ models of impact and considers two different regimes of impact: gross slip, and slip–stick, described in terms of coefﬁcients
of friction and restitution. As a result, the angles of scattering of the balls just after the impact (post-collision angles) and when the ball
reach pure rolling motion (post-transition angles) are expressed in terms of the angle of impact, the mass ratio, and the initial spin
conditions. Theoretical predictions are compared with experimental data for different materials, including regulation billiard ball and
superballs.
r 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Billiards; Impact; Non-smooth mechanics; Friction; Restitution

1. Introduction                                                               taken as frictional forces using the Amontons–Coulomb law
                                                                              by introducing the coefﬁcient of friction, m. Alternatively,
   From the seminal work of Coriolis [1], billiard-ball                       tangential coefﬁcients of restitution [5], and moment co-
collisions have claimed considerable attention along time.                    efﬁcient of restitution [3] can be deﬁned. In the more recent
In general, the impact event is described in terms of a                       formulation of Chatterjee and Ruina [6], the normal impulse
discontinuous change in the velocities of the balls where the                 is taken as an independent variable so that terminal
collision is treated as inelastic and frictionless [2]. This type             tangential to normal impulse ratio characterizes the impact.
of descriptions falls within the so-called non-smooth                         For collisions with continuous sliding in any direction, this
dynamics, where collisions are described in terms of                          ratio equals the coefﬁcient of friction.
‘instantaneous’ forces acting on a single contact point.                         Alternatively, collisions can be described in terms of
   In the context of such discontinuous or non-smooth                         continuous forces acting along a ﬁnite time between the
mechanics, billiard-ball collisions can be described within                   contacting points of the colliding objects, as taken by
the more general formulation of impact due to Brach [3]                       Keller for impact with sliding between rigid bodies [7].
and Kane and Levinson [4]. These authors consider friction                    Here, mechanical properties of bodies during collision can
effects during the ‘instantaneous’ impact event, so that two                  be represented in different ways. Thus, Maw et al. [8,9]
impact regimes, with and without sliding between the                          obtained an inelasticity solution for the traction distribu-
contacting points of the colliding bodies, are predicted.                     tion in annuli surrounding the contact point for the
The inelasticity of the impact is described in terms of the                   collinear impact between rough spheres subjected to both
coefﬁcient of restitution, e, the condition of no sliding                     tangential and normal relative displacement. Alternatively,
being formulated by equalizing tangential velocities of the                   the small deforming region of contact can be represented as
contacting points of the bodies at the end of the impact.                     a deformable massless particle. The compliance of a small
When sliding exists through the impact, tangential forces are                 elastoplastic region around the contact point of one body is
                                                                              then represented by discrete elements, oriented in the
   E-mail address: antonio.domenech@uv.es                                     normal and tangential directions, connected to the massless

0020-7403/$ - see front matter r 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.ijmecsci.2007.11.006
                                                     ARTICLE IN PRESS
                               A. Doménech / International Journal of Mechanical Sciences 50 (2008) 752–763                                753

particle which can either stick or slide on the surface of the          balls after the impact, with the angle of impact, the mass
second body, as described by Stronge [10–13]. By employ-                ratio and the coefﬁcients of restitution and friction, are
ing speciﬁc compliance relations one obtains smooth                     obtained. This formulation incorporates, following Marlow
dynamics of the time-dependent processes of stick and/or                [22] and Alciatore [23], friction with the pool and
sliding occurring during the impact, depending on the                   extends prior studies on billiard-ball collisions [24], and
relative tangential velocity of the contacting points of                ball rebounds on horizontal rough surfaces [25] where
bodies.                                                                 a discontinuous model based on the formulations of
   Following the recent formulation of Stronge et al.                   Brach, and Kane and Levinson was discussed. In agreement
[12,13], if the tangential relative velocity is sufﬁciently             with literature [2–25], the coefﬁcients of restitution and
large, there is continuous slip in the initial direction                friction will be taken here as material-dependent, velocity-
throughout the contact period. In this case gross slip                  independent constants. Experimental data on steel, rubber,
occurs so that the velocity of slip only slows during impact.           and regulation billiard balls are used in addition to some
If the initial tangential relative velocity is small, so that the       literature data for testing the proposed relationships.
ratio of tangential to normal force is less than the
coefﬁcient of friction, m, the contact initially sticks until a         2. Theory
terminal period of slip is attained. Finally, for intermediate
tangential relative velocity, there is initial slip at the              2.1. General approach
contacting point until the speed of slip has slowed
sufﬁciently so that stick can occur. In the following period               Let us consider the collision between two homogeneous
of stick, the tangential relative velocity is reduced until the         spheres moving on a ﬂat horizontal surface. As schema-
direction of the tangential force reverses. This intermediate           tized in Fig. 1, a normal-tangential coordinate system is
period of stick persists until the reversed tangential force is         chosen such that the line through the sphere centres is the
as large as the friction limit and then sliding is re-                  normal axis ðxÞ. The tangential axis ðyÞ is perpendicular to
established. Accordingly, for planar collisions with friction,          the normal axis and lies in a horizontal plane parallel to the
three impact regimes can be distinguished: stick–slip,                  supporting surface. The z-axis is deﬁned by the outward
slip–stick–slip, and gross slip or continuous slip. Experi-             direction normal from the supporting surface. It is assumed
mental data using microforce sensing in various conﬁgura-               that the cue sphere 1 is projected with a linear velocity vo
tions [14–18], have conﬁrmed general trends of such                     against the object sphere 2 which is initially at rest. We
continuous models, tangential force reversal and different              consider the case in which a forward horizontal spin, oo ,
impact regimes, in particular.                                          with components oox , ooy , along the x, y, axes, and a
   The case of the impact between billiard balls is                     vertical (or pivotment) spin, ooz , along the z-axis are
complicated because not only a ball–ball interaction, but               imparted to the cue sphere.
also a sphere-supporting surface interaction, has to be                    In conventional ‘discontinuous’ rigid body mechanics
accounted. Here, friction effects play a crucial role with              the impact event is represented in terms of ‘instantaneous’
regard of post-collision paths of the balls. In fact,                   normal and tangential impulses, F n , F t , which can be
frictionless models are unable to explain the paths of the
balls when ‘English’ spin effects (forward/topspin and
backward/backspin, pivoting spin) are imparted to the
balls [19]. The incorporation of surface friction into theory
of particle collision is of interest in a wide variety of
applications; in particular, for modelling the dynamics of
granular matter [20,21].
   Remarkably, predictions from discontinuous and con-
tinuous models coincide when slip exists throughout the
impact [10–13], so that differences are concentrated in
the no-sliding collision regime. Additionally, it should be
emphasized that, with regard to post-collision velocity,
stick–slip and slip–stick–slip and gross slip regimes can be
reduced solely to a stick and a gross slip responses.
   It is reported here a single, ‘discontinuous’ model for the
impact between rigid spheres moving on a rough, inﬁnitely
massive, horizontal surface that incorporates the essential
features resulting from the continuous model of Stronge
[10–13] into a discontinuous frame for the general case in
which the cue ball has arbitrary values of English spins. As
a result, a series of velocity-independent equations relating
the post-collision and post-transition angles deﬁned by the                     Fig. 1. Schematics for the impact between billiard balls.
                                                       ARTICLE IN PRESS
754                              A. Doménech / International Journal of Mechanical Sciences 50 (2008) 752–763

expressed in terms of the changes in momentum. Con-
sidering separately the horizontal and vertical components
of the tangential impulse, F th , F tv , one can write:
F n ¼ m1 ðv1x  vox Þ ¼ m2 v2x ,                                (1)

F th ¼ m1 ðv1y  voy Þ ¼ m2 v2x ,                               (2)
where vox , voy represent the components of the centre of
mass velocity of the cue sphere before the impact, and vjx ,
                                                                          Fig. 2. Impulse ‘free-body’ diagram for a cue ball with forward ‘English’
vjy ðj ¼ 1; 2Þ the components for the centre of mass velocity             spin striking a object ball initially at rest.
of both spheres immediately after the collision.
   For a collinear collision, the normal and tangential                   surface. As schematized in Fig. 2, these forces can be
impulsive forces can be treated as independent. The spheres               described in terms of a main normal reaction impulse, N,
modify their angular velocities by effect of the torque                   and a frictional impulse, F f , subsequently decomposed into
imparted by the tangential forces during the impact.                      its components in the x and y directions, F fx , F fy . Here N
Taking initial angular velocity components o2x ð0Þ ¼ 0,                   can be taken as equal to F tv , a condition that ensures that
o2y ð0Þ ¼ 0, oox ¼ oo sin c, ooy ¼ oo cos c, the correspond-              the vertical component of the centre of mass velocity of the
ing values after the impact will be, o2x ¼ 0, o1x ¼ oox ¼                 sphere 2 is strictly equal to zero after the impact. Assuming
oo sin c, and                                                             that F tv a0, so that the linear and angular velocities of the
RF tv ¼ I 1 ðo1y  ooy Þ ¼ I 2 o2y ,                            (3)      sphere 2 immediately after the impact will be given by

RF th ¼ I 1 ðoz1  ozo Þ ¼ I 2 oz2 .                            (4)      m2 v2x ¼ v2 cos d2 ¼ F n þ F fx ,                                    (9)

Notice that this formulation can easily be applied to
                                                                          m2 v2y ¼ v2 sin d2 ¼ F ty  F fy ,                                  (10)
billiard-ball collisions taking M ¼ 1, and to describe the
rebound of a sphere against a rough, inﬁnitely massive
vertical plane taking M ¼ 0.                                              m2 Ro2x ¼ ð5=2ÞF fy ,                                               (11)
   Introducing the angles of impact and scattering depicted
in Fig. 1 and taking M ¼ m1 =m2 , Eqs. (1) and (2) can be                 m2 Ro2y ¼ ð5=2ÞðF tv  F fx Þ.                                      (12)
rewritten as
                                                                          These equations apply at termination of impact if F tv a0.
Mðvo cos c  v1 cos d1 Þ ¼ v2 cos d2 ,                           (5)      For the spin about vertical axis one can write

Mðvo sin c  v1 sin d1 Þ ¼ v2 sin d2 .                           (6)      m2 Roz2 ¼ m1 ðRoz1  Rozo Þ ¼ ð5=2ÞF th .                          (13)
The inelasticity of the impact can be described, as usually,              As a result of the impact, the spheres are projected along
in terms of the ‘normal’ coefﬁcient of restitution, e, deﬁned             the horizontal plane with a combination of translation and
as the negative ratio between the normal components of the                rotation motions. Then, friction with the horizontal surface
relative velocity of the points of contact after and before               determines, as described by Hopkins and Patterson [26],
the impact.                                                               that the spheres describe curved paths until the pure rolling
   In the studied case this deﬁnition yields                              motion is ﬁnally established. This situation corresponds to
e ¼ ðv2 cos d2  v1 cos d1 Þ=vo cos c.                           (7)      rectilinear motions deﬁning post-transition angles, W1 , W2 ,
                                                                          as shown in Fig. 1. The law of angular momentum yields,
Accordingly, the normal impulse can be expressed as                       for the centre of mass velocities when pure rolling motion is
                                                                        reached, vnjx ¼ Ronjy , vnjy ¼ Ronjx ðj ¼ 1; 2Þ : Rmj ðvnjx  vjx Þ ¼
           1þe
F n ¼ m1          vo cos c.                                      (8)      I j ðonjy  ojy Þ and Rmj ðvnjyx  vjy Þ ¼ I j ðonjx  ojx Þ, so that
          1þM
In this formulation, there is a vertical frictional contact               vnjx ¼ ð5=7Þvjx þ ð2=7ÞRojy ,                                       (14)
impulse at the nominal contact between spheres, due to
forward spin. Here, it is considered the case in which the                vnjy ¼ ð5=7Þvjy þ ð2=7ÞRojx .                                       (15)
cue sphere is launched with a forward spin, so that the
vertical impulse acts downwards on the sphere 2, and                      Combining the above equations, one can obtain velocity-
upwards to the sphere 1. Accordingly, the sphere 1 jumps                  independent equations for post-collision and post-transi-
off the horizontal surface. As far as this effect does not                tion angles in function of the angle of impact, the mass
affect signiﬁcantly the horizontal components of velocity,                ratio, M, and the coefﬁcients of restitution and friction
the separation of the sphere 1 from the pool will be ignored              (vide infra) providing that appropriate force laws are
in the following.                                                         used. In the following we consider different ‘discontinuous’
   In this scheme, the sphere 2 is submitted to impulsive                 cases derived from the ‘continuous’ formulation of Stronge
forces resulting from its interaction with the horizontal                 [10–13].
                                                       ARTICLE IN PRESS
                                 A. Doménech / International Journal of Mechanical Sciences 50 (2008) 752–763                        755

2.2. Gross slip case                                                      post-transition angles:
                                                                          tan W1
  We consider that sliding exists in the contact between
spheres 1 and 2 and between the sphere 2 and the                                   ð1 þ MÞð5=2 þ Roo =vo Þ tan c  ð5=2Þmð1 þ eÞ sin s
                                                                             ¼                                                          ,
supporting horizontal surface. Assuming that Amontons–                           ð1 þ MÞðRoo =vo Þ þ ð5=2ÞðM  eÞ  ð5=2Þmð1 þ eÞ cos s
Coulomb friction is operative, the conditions F t ¼ mF n ,                                                                           ð24Þ
and F f ¼ m0 N hold, m and m0 being, respectively, the
coefﬁcients of (kinetic) sliding friction between spheres 1                           m sin s
                                                                          tan W2 ¼             .                                     (25)
and 2 and between the sphere 2 and the supporting surface.                           1  m cos
To estimate the horizontal and vertical components of
                                                                          This formulation contains a previous formulation [24]
the tangential force, it is assumed in the following that the
                                                                          taking m0 ¼ 0, and reduces to that of Wallace and
direction of the tangential force is that of the relative
                                                                          Schroeder [2] by inserting M ¼ 1, e ¼ 1, m ¼ 0, m0 ¼ 0.
velocity of the contacting points of the spheres at the
beginning of the impact. Introducing the angle s, deﬁned
                                                                          2.3. Discontinuous description of impact with stick–slip
by the directions of the horizontal component of the
tangential velocity at the point of contact just after the
                                                                            Following Brach [3] and Kane and Levinson [4], under
impact and its component along the y-axis, the above
                                                                          determined conditions sliding motion ceases during the
condition yields
                                                                          impact event so that the tangential components of the
          vo sin c þ ROo F th                                             velocities of the contacting points of the spheres equal to
tan s ¼                 ¼      .                                (16)
             Roo cos c    F tv                                            zero just after the collision. Here, Eqs. (18)–(21) are not
To propose a similar relation for the components of F f ,                 valid and a new set of impulse functions has to be
we introduce the velocities of the point of contact of the                calculated. The no-slip condition at impact point can be
sphere 2 with the supporting surface resulting from the                   expressed by means of the relationships:
sole action of the F n and F t impulses. Now, one introduces              v2 sin d2 þ Roz2 ¼ v1 sin d1  Roz1 ,                      (26)
the angle j between the velocity of the sphere 2-pool
contact just after the impact and its component along the                 v2z  Ro1y ¼ v1z þ Ro2y .                                  (27)
y-axis. Then,                                                             Accordingly, the horizontal and vertical components of the
              F th       F fy                                             tangential impulse becomes
tan j ¼                ¼      .                                 (17)
        F n þ ð5=2ÞF tv F fx                                                       ð2=7Þm1
                                                                          F th ¼           ðvo sin c þ Rozo Þ,                       (28)
In this scheme,                                                                    ð1 þ MÞ
                               
                           1þe                                                     ð2=7Þm1
F th ¼ mF n sin s ¼ mm1           vo cos c sin s,           (18)          F tv ¼           Roo cos c.                                (29)
                          1þM                                                      ð1 þ MÞ
                                                                        Remarkably, these components satisfy Eq. (16).
                           1þe
F tv ¼ mF n cos s ¼ mm1           vo cos c cos s,           (19)             Following Stronge [10–13], the situation is more
                          1þM
                                                                          complicated, because for low relative tangential velocities,
                                                                        stick–slip, and slip–stick–slip regimes of impact can take
        0            0        1þe
F fy ¼ m N sin j ¼ m m m1            vo cos c cos s sin j,                place. Both regimes can be uniﬁed, however, within a
                             1þM
                                                                          unique slip–stick behaviour following the approaches of
                                                            (20)
                                                                          Walton [27] and Foerster et al. [28].
                                                                           To translate the above no-sliding regimes into a non-
                              1þe
F fx ¼ m0 N cos j ¼ m0 m m1           vo cos c cos s cos j.               smooth formulation, one can take an operational approach
                              1þM
                                                                          whose discussion will be presented for the rebound of a
                                                            (21)          homogeneous sphere on a rough horizontal surface. This
Combining Eqs. (16)–(21) with Eqs. (5)–(7), one can arrive                situation has been treated by several authors using
to the following velocity-independent equations for the                   discontinuous [17,18,24,29] and continuous [10–14] models.
scattering angles                                                         Let us consider a homogeneous sphere impacting obliquely
                                                                      a horizontal plane with velocity vo and no spin. The normal
           1þM                  1þe
tan d1 ¼            tan c  m         sin s,          (22)                impulse is given by F y ¼ mvoy ð1 þ eÞ, so that the vertical
           Me                 M e                                       component of the centre of mass velocity just after the
                                                                          impact is vy ¼ evoy . The horizontal component centre of
           mðsin s  m0 cos s sin jÞ
tan d2 ¼                             ,                          (23)      mass velocity and the angular velocity of the sphere just
             1  mm0 cos s cos j                                          after the impact are given by vx ¼ vox  F x =m and
Where tan j ¼ m sin s=½1 þ ð5=2Þ m cos s. Using Eqs. (14)                Ro ¼ ð5=2ÞðF x =mÞ, while the tangential velocity of the
and 15, one can arrive to the following expressions for the               contacting point at the separation, V x , is equal to vx þ Ro.
                                                             ARTICLE IN PRESS
756                                  A. Doménech / International Journal of Mechanical Sciences 50 (2008) 752–763

   In the case of continuous slip, the horizontal impulse,                        It will be used an operational approach, similar to
F x , is given by                                                              Walton’s treatment [27], assuming that: (i) F s contributes
                                                                               to the horizontal impulse so that the total horizontal
F x ¼ mF y ¼ mð1 þ eÞmvoy .                                          (30)     impulse acting on the sphere equals to that described by the
                                                                               classical discontinuous model [3,4]; (ii) the contribution of
Here the post-collision horizontal component centre of
                                                                               F s to the vertical impulse is negligible; (iii) F s creates an
mass velocity and the angular velocities are vx ¼ vox 
                                                                               additional torque of magnitude ð2=7ÞmRF x . Accordingly,
mð1 þ eÞvoy and Ro ¼ ð5=2Þmð1 þ eÞvoy , whereas the velo-
                                                                               one can write
city of the contacting point immediately after the impact is
given by V x ¼ vox  ð7=2Þmð1 þ eÞvoy . Accordingly, pre-                      mðvx  vox Þ ¼ ð2=7Þmvox ,                                 (32)
dicted plots of V x =mvoy vs. vox =mvoy , used by Maw et al.
[8,9] and Stronge [10], consist of a straight line of slope 1                  Ro ¼ ð5=2Þð2=7Þ½1 þ ð2=7Þmvox .                           (33)
and ordinate at the origin ð7=2Þð1 þ eÞ.                                      As a result, the velocity of the point of contact of the
   In the classical discontinuous formulation of no-slip                       sphere at the end of the impact will satisfy the relationship:
impact [3,4], the velocity of the contacting point at the
separation becomes zero and then                                               V x ¼ ð10=49Þmvox .                                        (34)
                                                                               Then, plots of V x =mvoy vs. vox =mvoy , yield a straight line of
F x ¼ ð2=7Þmvox .                                                    (31)     slope 10=49 and y-intercept close to zero.
To provide a non-smooth formulation of slip–stick, one                            To describe impact event in slip–stick regime in two-
can consider a simpliﬁed representation in which the sphere                    sphere collisions, a simpliﬁed approach will be taken. It will
produces a small deformation in the supporting surface as                      be assumed that the net normal and tangential impulses are
described by Hutchings et al. [29] for the impact of hard                      equal to those given by the conventional discontinuous
spheres against a ductile, inﬁnite plane. In smooth                            model whereas a total torque of magnitude ð2=7Þ½1 þ
mechanics, the small deforming region of contact of the                        ð2=7ÞmRF t appears.
sphere is represented by discrete tangential and normal                           In the following three possible cases will be considered,
compliance elements connected to a massless particle which                     involving slip–stick (denoted by s) and/or sliding (denoted
stick on the surface of the second body. To provide a non-                     by m) in the sphere–sphere and sphere 2-horizontal
smooth model for that situation, it will be assumed that                       supporting surface interactions. These will be represented,
during the ‘instantaneous’ impact event, the rough                             by simplicity, as s–m, m–s, and s–s. This scheme is
horizontal plane is deformed so that the sphere sticks                         completed by the case in which sliding exists in both
and slips along a small spherical-shaped deformed surface,                     interactions (m2m case), discussed in the previous section.
so that the horizontal impulse, F x , is accompanied by a
friction impulse, F s , as illustrated in Fig. 3. This friction                2.4. s–m case
impulse should contribute to both the total horizontal
and vertical impulses acting on the sphere. Obviously,                           It is considered here that sliding exists during the
representation in Fig. 3 overestimates the size of the                         impulsive interaction between the sphere 2 and the
deformed region. This representation must be viewed as                         horizontal surface. This situation will be described using
an ‘equivalent system’, as compliance formalism used in                        Eqs. (8), (28) and (29) so that post-collision angle d1
smooth impact mechanics, rather than a realistic descrip-                      becomes
tion of the sphere deformation occurring in the impact                                                           
                                                                                          M þ 5=7               2=7     Rozo
event [30].                                                                    tan d1 ¼             tan c                    .      (35)
                                                                                           M e               M  e vo cos c
                                                                               Now, a torque ty equal to ð2=7ÞRF tv ð1 þ ð2=7Þm cos sÞ
                                                                               appears so that Eq. (17) is replaced by
                                                                               tan j
                                                                                                     ð2=7Þðvo sin c þ Rozo Þ
                                                                                  ¼                                                      .
                                                                                      ð1 þ eÞvo cos c þ ð5=7Þð1 þ ð2=7Þm cos sÞRoo cos c
                                                                                                                                         ð36Þ
                                                                               The forces acting on the sphere 2 by effect of its interaction
                                                                               with the supporting surface will be
                                                                                        ð2=7Þm0 m1 Roo cos c cos j
                                                                               F fx ¼                              ,                       (37)
                                                                                                  1þM
Fig. 3. Non-smooth modelling of the impact of a rigid sphere against a
deformable horizontal plane. Schematics in the plane of the initial velocity
                                                                                        ð2=7Þm0 m1 Roo cos c sin j
                                                                               F fy ¼                              .                       (38)
of the sphere where the deformation is highly overestimated.                                     1þM
                                                         ARTICLE IN PRESS
                                   A. Doménech / International Journal of Mechanical Sciences 50 (2008) 752–763                       757

Combining Eqs. (36)–(38), with Eqs. (5)–(12), one obtains                   2.6. m–s case
for the post-collision angle d2 :
                                                                              Here, sliding exists between spheres 1 and 2 during the
tan d2
                                                                            impact event while stick occurs in the sphere 2-horizontal
            tan c þ ROo =vo cos c  m0 ðRoo =vo Þ sin j                     surface contact. In agreement with prior considerations,
   ¼                                                        . ð39Þ
         ð7=2Þð1 þ eÞ  ½ð2=7Þm cos s þ m0 cos jðRoo =vo Þ                 Eqs. (16)–(19) apply so that angles d1 and W1 are again
The corresponding equations for post-transition angles W1 ,                 described by Eqs. (22) and (24), respectively.
W2 , can be derived from the above and Eqs. (14), (15),                       In this case, the impulses F fx ,F fy can be expressed as
resulting the expressions:                                                           ð2=7Þm1 ð1 þ eÞvo cos c½1 þ ð5=2Þm cos s
                                                                            F fx ¼                                             ,      (46)
tan W1
                                                                                                      1þM
       ½ðM þ 5=7Þ þ ð2=5ÞðRoo =vo Þ tan c  ð2=7ÞðRozo =vo cos cÞ                 ð2=7Þm1 mð1 þ eÞvo cos c sin s
   ¼                                                               ,        F fy ¼                                ,                 (47)
       M  e þ ½ð2=5Þð1 þ MÞ  ð2=7Þ½1 þ ð2=7Þm cos sðRoo =vo Þ                              1þM
                                                                  ð40Þ      where s is given by Eq. (16). Using Eqs. (5)–(12), and (46),
                                                                            (47), one obtains
                   tan c þ Rozo =vo cos c
tan W2 ¼                                          .               (41)                   m sin s
            ð7=2Þð1 þ eÞ  ½1 þ ð2=7ÞmðRoo =vo Þ                           tan d2 ¼               .                                  (48)
                                                                                       1  m cos s
It should be noted that the slip contribution of the                        These equations, combined with Eqs. (14), (15) yield
slip–stick regime (given by m-containing terms) in the
sphere 1–sphere 2 contact appears for post-transition angles                                       ð7=2 þ m0 Þm sin s
                                                                            tan W2 ¼                                              .   (49)
but not for post-collision ones. Remarkably, the effect of                             ð7=2Þð1  m cos sÞ þ m0 ð1 þ ð5=2Þm cos sÞ
sliding in the sphere 2-horizontal surface interaction,
expressed by m0 -containing terms, cancels for W2 , only                    2.7. Impact regimes
remaining for d2 .
                                                                               As discussed in the preceding sections, four cases can be
2.5. s–s case                                                               discerned within the approach presented here for two-
                                                                            sphere billiard-type collisions. Their occurrence depends
  In this case, it is assumed that slip–stick conditions                    signiﬁcantly on the impact angle, c, the coefﬁcients of
are valid in both the sphere–sphere interaction and the                     restitution and friction, and the initial spin conditions,
sphere 2-supporting surface interaction. Accordingly,                       expressed in the foregoing set of equations by the Roo =vo
Eqs. (28), (29) are again used so that post-collision angle                 and Rozo =vo cos c ratios.
d1 and post-transition angle W1 are again described by                         First of all, in the most single case where Roo =vo ¼ 1;
Eqs. (35) and (40), respectively. For obtaining angles d2                   and Rozo ¼ 0; i.e., when the cue sphere is initially in pure
and W2 , it is assumed that the tangential velocity of the                  rolling motion without additional ‘English’ spin, the
contacting point of the sphere 2 with the horizontal surface                transition from the stick regime to the sliding regime in
equals to zero just after the overall impact event. This                    the sphere 1–sphere 2 interaction occurs at a limiting
assumption leads to                                                         impact angle, cLIM , given by
         ð2=7Þð2=7Þm1 ðvo sin c þ Rozo Þ                                                       2
F fy ¼                                   ,                        (42)      cos cLIM ¼                ,                               (50)
                    1þM                                                                   7mo ð1 þ eÞ
                                                                            where mo represents the static coefﬁcient of friction in
         ð2=7Þm1 ½ð1 þ eÞvo cos c þ ð5=7Þð1 þ ð2=7Þm cos jÞRoo cos c
F fx ¼                                                               .      the contact between spheres 1 and 2, as described by Kane
                                    1þM
                                                                            and Levinson [4]. For simplicity, in the following we
                                                                  (43)
                                                                            consider mo ¼ m in all cases, an approximation taken
Using Eqs. (42), (43) conjointly with Eqs. (12)–(15), one                   usually in both smooth and non-smooth theoretical
can arrive at                                                               approaches [3,7,10–13]. Remarkably, the transition angle
                                                                            is independent on the mass ratio, M, a situation described
                     tan c þ Rozo =vo cos c
tan d2 ¼                                                .         (44)      by Stronge [10].
            ð7=2Þð1 þ eÞ  ½1 þ ð2=7Þm cos sÞðRoo =vo Þ
                                                                               The transition from slip–stick to gross slip can be
Now, considering the conditions imposed by Eqs. (14) and                    graphically illustrated in terms of the dependency of F th on
15, the post-transition angle W2 becomes                                    the angle of impact, depicted in Fig. 4 for e ¼ 0:80, using

                                           
                          1 þ ð2=7Þm0 sin j ðtan c þ Rozo =vo cos cÞ
tan W2 ¼                                                                                .                                             (45)
         ð1 þ eÞ½7=2 þ ð2=7Þm0 cos j  ½1 þ ð2=7Þm cos sÞ½1  ð5=7Þm0 cos jðRoo =vo Þ
                                                                   ARTICLE IN PRESS
758                                      A. Doménech / International Journal of Mechanical Sciences 50 (2008) 752–763

                                                                                       Fig. 5. Impact regimes in the impact angle/horizontal spin diagram for the
Fig. 4. Variation of F th on c for the impact of spheres with e ¼ 1. Dotted            collisions between rough spheres having e ¼ 0:50, m ¼ 0:30, m0 ¼ 0:50.
line: slip–stick case (Eq. (28)); continuous lines: gross slip case (Eq. (18))
with m ¼ 0:10, 0.15, and 0.25.

Eqs. (18) and (28). As we increase c, we move up the                                      Fig. 5 shows a two-dimensions diagram for collisions
dotted line (stick regime) until we reach the solid line                               between identical rough spheres with e ¼ 0:50; m ¼ 0:30;
appropriate for the value of m, so that on increasing the                              m0 ¼ 0:50, taking the Roo =vo ratio as an independent
value of the coefﬁcient of friction, the transition from stick                         variable. For these parameter values, the s–s regime is
to sliding occurs at larger angles of impact.                                          entirely absent. For small values of Roo =vo sliding prevails
   When sliding exists in the sphere 1–sphere 2 interaction,                           at high impact angles, thus deﬁning the m2m zone of the
the transition from slip–stick to gross slip in the sphere                             diagram. At low Roo =vo and low impact angle values the
2-horizontal surface interaction takes place for                                       s–m regime is attained, while at low impact angles but
                                                                                     large Roo =vo values, the m–s regime takes place. Roughly,
    21 4 0 2                                                                           the proposed formulation indicates that the occurrence of
m2       m cos2 cLIM þ 5m cos cLIM þ 1 þ m2 ¼ 0.
     4 49                                                                              the s–s regime requires conjunction of relatively low
                                                          (51)                         friction in the sphere–sphere contact and high friction in
                                                                                       the sphere–pool contact. Accordingly, for these parameter
As in the case of the sphere 1–sphere 2 interactions, the
                                                                                       values, implying relatively high friction for sphere–sphere
occurrence of stick or slip in the sphere 2-supporting
                                                                                       and sphere–pool contacts, the s–s regime is absent.
surface interaction will depend on the tangential velocity/
normal velocity, V 2h =V 2v , of the contacting point in the
beginning of the contact. This ratio can be expressed as                               3. Experimental
       qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
         ðF n þ ð5=2ÞF tv Þ2 þ F 2th                                                      Experiments on collisions between steel spheres (dia-
V 2h
     ¼                                                . (52)                           meter 2.50 cm, mass 70.0 g) billiard ball and rubber ball
V 2v                     F tv                                                          (mass 46.4 g, diameter 4.60 cm) moving on a regulation
Since in general F n is clearly larger than F tv and F th ,                            billiard pool were performed. The velocity of the cue ball
one can expect that the V 2h =V 2v ratio will be usually larger,                       was adjusted to 0:75  0:05 m=s using an auxiliary slanted
so that sliding must prevail in the percussive contact                                 track. The distance from the edge of the slanted track to
between the sphere 2 and the supporting surface. In                                    the object ball was of 50 cm; this distance was great enough
agreement with this, when stick exists in the sphere                                   to ensure that the cue ball acquires pure rolling motion
1–sphere 2 interaction, the transition from slip–stick to                              before the impact. Complementary experiments with
gross slip in the sphere 2-horizontal surface interaction                              billiard and rubber balls were made by projecting the cue
takes place for                                                                        ball with different initial spins with the help of a tapering
            qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ        rod. This was horizontally launched striking the surface of
tan cLIM ¼ ð49=4Þm0 2  ½ð7=2Þð1 þ eÞ þ 5=22 .                                 (53)   the cue ball in a point horizontally separated ca. 1 cm of the
                                                                                       centre of the ball. The angles of impact, post-collision and
These results indicate that the s–s regime can only be                                 post-transition were determined from the photographs
achieved for very high values of the coefﬁcient of friction                            recorded with a conventional camera placed in a vertical
between the sphere 2 and the supporting surface.                                       position 75 cm just over the point of contact between the
                                                              ARTICLE IN PRESS
                                     A. Doménech / International Journal of Mechanical Sciences 50 (2008) 752–763                                   759

balls at the impact as previously described, using exposure                     from experimental data. Interestingly, predictions derived
times between 1.2 and 2.0 s [24].                                               from the current discontinuous approach (e) provide the
                                                                                better ﬁt with experimental data in the slip–stick region of
                                                                                the diagram.
4. Results and discussion
                                                                                   In Fig. 7, experimental data for the rebound of a rubber
                                                                                ball on a rough surface taken from Garwin [17] are
4.1. Rebound experiments
                                                                                compared with theoretical predictions for the slip–stick
                                                                                regime (continuous lines) with m ¼ 0:55, and the sliding
   The suitability of the proposed non-smooth description
                                                                                regime taking e ¼ 0:92, and m ¼ 0:55, 0:30, and 0:20
of the slip–stick regime was tested by using experimental
                                                                                (discontinuous lines). In the region where gross slip occurs,
data provided by Johnson [14] for an elastic rubber ball
                                                                                a satisfactory agreement between experimental data and
striking a heavy steel plate at a small speed. This case can
                                                                                theory, using Eqs. (3) and (16)–(21) with M ¼ 0, can be
easily be derived from the foregoing set of equations by
                                                                                observed. As can be seen in Fig. 7, no conclusive data were
inserting M ¼ 0. In Fig. 6, such experimental data are
                                                                                available for the slip–stick region.
compared with theoretical predictions from the conven-
tional non-smooth model (a) [6,7], the continuous models
of Stronge (b) [10], and Maw et al. (c) [8,9], as well as the                   4.2. Two-sphere collisions
binary models from Walton and Foerster et al. (d) [27,28]
and the current model (e). In this ﬁgure, the (tangential                         Two-sphere collision experiments involving rolling with-
velocity of the point of contact at the end of the rebound)/                    out spin prior to impact were performed with steel
(tangential velocity of this point at the beginning of the                      bearings, billiard ball and rubber balls. Experimental data
impact) ratio is plotted against the (tangential velocity of                    provided a satisfactory agreement with predictions from
the point of contact at the beginning of the impact)/                           the previously described models, the best ﬁt between theory
(normal velocity of this point at the beginning of the                          and experiment being obtained for the values of the
impact) one. Such V x =mV oy vs. V ox =mV oy plots deﬁnes two                   coefﬁcients of restitution and friction listed in Table 1.
regions in the diagram corresponding to the slip–stick                          Fig. 8 shows a typical photograph recorded on a billiard
regime (left) and the common predictions for the gross slip                     pool, providing an image comparable with the scheme
regime (right).                                                                 depicted in Fig. 1. Fig. 9 compares experimental data
   Experimental data are far from the conventional                              values of tan d1 (a) and tan W1 (b) vs. tan c with theoretical
discontinuous model represented by line (a) while are close                     predictions for the oblique impact of rubber superballs.
to continuous models of Maw et al. (c) and Stronge (b).
Binary models represented by line (d) also diverge clearly

Fig. 6. Variation of tangential velocity of the contact point on elastic        Fig. 7. Comparison of experimental data for the rebound of a rubber ball
rubber superball striking a steel plate at instant of separation on the angle   on a rough surface taken from Garwin [17] and theoretical predictions for
of incidence. Experimental data taken from Johnson [14]. Theoretical            the slip–stick regime (continuous line) with m ¼ 0:55, and the gross slip
predictions from the Brach [3] and Kane and Levinson [4] formulations           regime taking e ¼ 0:92, and m ¼ 0:55 (a), m ¼ 0:30 (b), and m ¼ 0:20 (c).
(a, - - -), Stronge [10–13] (b; —), Maw et al. [8,9] (c, y), Walton [26] and    Gross line represents the ‘best’ ﬁt of data deﬁning a transition from
Foerster et al. [27] (d, .-.-), and the current model (e, —).                   stick–slip to gross slip.
                                                             ARTICLE IN PRESS
760                                  A. Doménech / International Journal of Mechanical Sciences 50 (2008) 752–763

Table 1
Values for the coefﬁcients of restitution and friction for the studied materials determined from the best ﬁt between theoretical equations (23), (24), (40) and
(41) and experimental data

                                                        Billiard balls            Steel bearings            Rubber balls              Billiard balls (Ref. [23])

Ball–ball coefﬁcient of restitution                     0:97  0:02               0:92  0:02               0:88  0:03               0:93  0:03
Ball–ball coefﬁcient of friction (dynamic)              0:07  0:02               0:14  0:02               0:60  0:03               0:06  0:04
Ball–ball coefﬁcient of friction (static)                                         0:18  0:03
Ball–table coefﬁcient of friction (dynamic)             0:15  0:02               0:15  0:02               0:55  0:03               0:10  0:05

Comparison from the values recently provided by Alciatore [23].

Fig. 8. Photograph taken at an exposure time of 2.0 s on a billiard-ball
collision.

Here, the best ﬁt of experimental data to theory was found
for the s–m model, inserting the values for e and m presented                     Fig. 9. Variation of values of tan d1 (squares, a) and tan y1 (triangles, b)
                                                                                  on tan c for collisions of ‘superball’ rubber spheres. Theoretical lines for a
in Table 1 into Eqs. (35) and (40). The predicted values for                      slip–stick regime taking the values for e and m in Table 1.
the angles d1 and W1 , however, were close to those derived
from the m2m model using the above parameter values, so
that experimental data using angles d1 and W1 were non-                           impact, so that only the m2m regime was observed in
conclusive with regard to the transition from the s–m                             practice.
regime to the m2m one. Additionally, this transition should                          For billiard-ball collisions, experimental data agree with
occur at a large angle of impact. As discussed below,                             theory from the m2m model taking the values for e, m and m0
transition from one impact regime to another is better                            summarized in Table 1. These values are similar to those
monitored using the angle d2 , for which largely separate                         reported by Marlow [22] recently revised by Alciatore [23].
predictions are obtained (vide infra).                                            Consistently with prior results [24], for these parameter
   For collisions between steel bearings experimental values                      values, only the gross slip regime is operative for collisions
of d1 and W1 angles agreed with theory from Eqs. (22) and                         with Roo =vo ¼ 1, Rozo =vo ¼ 0; i.e., under these conditions,
(24) by taking the corresponding values (see Table 1)                             the slip–stick regime does not occur.
for e, m and m0 . This can be seen in Fig. 10, where the                             Variation of d2 with the impact angle illustrates the
experimental angles a1 ð¼ d1  cÞ and y1 are represented as                       signiﬁcant differences between the predictions of the gross
a function of the angle of impact, c, for collisions between                      slip and slip–stick regimes. As shown in Fig. 11, experi-
steel bearings. Continuous lines in this ﬁgure correspond to                      mental data for billiard-ball collisions is close to theory for
theoretical values for the sliding regime (Eqs. (22) and (24),                    the m2m regime (Eq. (23)), (continuous line (a)). This
whereas dotted lines correspond to the predictions from the                       prediction is close to that from the m–s model (Eq. (48),
s–m regime (Eqs. (36) and (40)). In this case, the transition                     using the values for e, m, and m0 (continuous line (b)) in
of stick–slip to gross slip takes place at a small angle of                       Table 1. Experimental data, however, clearly diverges from
                                                            ARTICLE IN PRESS
                                    A. Doménech / International Journal of Mechanical Sciences 50 (2008) 752–763                                      761

Fig. 10. Plots of a1 ð¼ d1  cÞ (a) and y1 (b) vs. the impact angle, c, for
collisions between steel bearings ðM ¼ 1Þ. Continuous lines correspond to
theoretical values for the m2m regime (Eqs. (22) and (24)) inserting the
                                                                              Fig. 11. Variation of d2 with the impact angle for billiard-ball collisions.
values for e and m summarized in Table 1. Dotted lines correspond to the
                                                                              Continuous lines: theory for m2m (a) and m–s (b) models; dotted lines:
predictions s–m regime using these parameter values.
                                                                              theory for s–s (c) and s–m (d) models, all taking the values for e, m, and m0
                                                                              contained in Table 1, whereas dashed line (e) corresponds to theory for the
                                                                              m2m model using m ¼ 0:15.
the predictions of the s–s (dotted line (c)) and s–m (dotted
line (d)) models, Eqs. (39) and (44), respectively, taking
these parameter values. Interestingly, the gross slip model
is sensitive to changes in the values of the coefﬁcients of
restitution and friction. This can also be seen on comparing
experimental data in Fig. 11 with theory for the m2m
regime (dashed line (e)), taking m ¼ 0:15.
   The transition from gross slip to slip–stick regimes can
be studied in more detail using data for collisions between
steel bearings depicted in Fig. 12, in which plots of d2 vs. c
are shown. Here, experimental data at impact angles lower
than 35 ﬁt with Eq. (39), corresponding to the s–m model,
by taking the e and m values in Table 1. At impact angles
above 35 , the m2m regime is attained and experimental
data ﬁt with Eq. (23) using those values for e and m.
   As shown in Fig. 12, experimental data appear to deﬁne
a ‘jump’ in the d2 vs. c curve. This feature can be
rationalized on considering that the transition from the
gross slip to slip–stick regime must occur at a limiting
impact angle, cL , at which the friction force reaches its
limiting value given by the value of the static coefﬁcient of
friction, mo , as formulated in Eq. (50). Since in general
mo am, a discontinuity in the d2 vs. c plots may appear in                    Fig. 12. Comparison of theoretical and experimental variation of d2 with
                                                                              c for collisions of steel bearings. Continuous line corresponds to theory
the transition from one regime to another. Experimental
                                                                              for a transition from s–m to m2m regimes taking the values for e , m and m0
data in Fig. 12 permits to estimate a value for the                           presented in Table 1 and taking a ‘jump’ corresponding to a static
static coefﬁcient of restitution of mo ¼ 0:18, because                        coefﬁcient of friction of mo ¼ 0:18. Dotted line corresponds to theoretical
the maximum d2 value in the ‘jump’ is located near the                        gross slip regime using the above values for e, m and m0 in Table 1.
                                                            ARTICLE IN PRESS
762                                 A. Doménech / International Journal of Mechanical Sciences 50 (2008) 752–763

                                                                              Fig. 14. Theoretical (approximate) paths for selected Roo =vo values for the
                                                                              impact between regulation billiard balls at c ¼ 45 from Eqs. (22)–(25),
                                                                              taking the m2m model with M ¼ 1, ROo =vo ¼ 0, e ¼ 0:97, m ¼ 0:07,
                                                                              m0 ¼ 0:15.
Fig. 13. Plots of d2 vs. impact angle for the impact of rubber spheres and
theoretical expectances for the s–m (continuous line) and m2m (dotted line)
models taking the values for e and m shown in Table 1.

corresponding theoretical gross slip curve (dotted line in
Fig. 12).
   Plots of d2 vs. c for the impact of rubber balls provided a
remarkably different behaviour. As shown in Fig. 13, the
impact of rubber spheres is dominated by the slip–stick
regime, experimental data ﬁtting with theoretical values
obtained by substituting the e and m values presented in
Table 1 into Eq. (39) (s–m model, continuous line). Here,
the m2m (dotted line) or m–s regimes are attained only for a
large impact angle (ca. 74 ) using the above parameter
values.

4.3. Billiards and superbilliards

   Interestingly, the described approach can be used for
predicting the paths of the spheres in billiards and pools for
different spin effects. Thus, the approximate paths in
billiard-ball ðM ¼ 1Þ collisions at an impact angle of 45                    Fig. 15. Theoretical (approximate) paths for selected Roo =vo values for
with no initial pivotment ðRozo =vo ¼ 0Þ and arbitrary                        the impact between rubber superballs balls at c ¼ 45 using
forward ‘English’ spin are depicted in Fig. 14. Here,                         Eqs. (35)–(41), taking the s–m model with M ¼ 1, ROo =vo ¼ 0, e ¼ 0:88.
Eqs. (22)–(25), corresponding to the m2m model are taken,
inserting the values for e , m and m0 listed in Table 1.                      to changes in the ‘English’ spin. On the contrary, for
A similar representation is given in Fig. 15 for collisions                   rubber balls, the path of the cue ball lightly varies with
between rubber balls (‘superbilliard’ collisions) under                       the Roo =vo ratio, whereas the path of the object ball
similar conditions. Here, the s–m model (Eqs. (39)–(41)),                     experiences signiﬁcant variations with that ratio. Similar
was taken to be operative using the above values for                          results were obtained for the variations of the paths with
e and m.                                                                      the initial spin about a vertical axis (spin of pivotment,
   The obtained representations indicate that, for billiard-                  Rozo =vo ) when the cue ball is initially moving in pure
ball collisions, the path of the cue ball after the impact is                 rolling motion ðRoo =vo ¼ 1Þ.
strongly inﬂuenced by the value of the Roo =vo ratio, while                     These paths differ remarkably from those predicted from
the trajectory of the object ball remains almost insensitive                  the frictionless model of Wallace and Schroeder [2]. In this
                                                             ARTICLE IN PRESS
                                    A. Doménech / International Journal of Mechanical Sciences 50 (2008) 752–763                                      763

model there is no account for impulsive frictional forces, so                   [7] Keller JB. Impact with friction. ASME Journal of Applied Mechanics
that no dependence of post-collision paths on the initial                           1986;53:1–4.
                                                                                [8] Maw N, Barber JR, Fawcett JN. The oblique impact of elastic
‘English’ spins can be predicted. A series of additional
                                                                                    spheres. Wear 1976;38:101–14.
experiments was performed by horizontally striking the cue                      [9] Maw N, Barber JR, Fawcett JN. The role of elastic tangential
ball with a tapering rod at a point separated ca. 1 cm at the                       compliance in oblique impact. Journal of Lubrication Technology
left or at the right from the ball centre. Here, the cue ball                       1981;103:74–80.
was projected with a given pivotment spin. Although a                          [10] Stronge WJ. Rigid body collisions with friction. Proceedings of the
control of the initial pivotment spin of the cue ball was                           Royal Society London 1990;A431:169–81.
                                                                               [11] Stronge WJ. Two-dimensional rigid-body impact with friction-
unavailable, the trajectories of the balls were close to those                      discussion. ASME Journal of Applied Mechanics 1993;60:564–6.
theoretically expected for pivotment spins ðRozo =vo Þ                         [12] Stronge WJ. Planar impact of rough compliant bodies. International
between þ0:3 and 0:3.                                                              Journal of Impact Engineering 1994;15:435–50.
                                                                               [13] Stronge WJ, James R, Ravani B. Oblique impact with friction and
                                                                                    tangential compliance. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
5. Conclusions                                                                      Society London 2001;A359:2447–65.
                                                                               [14] Johnson KL. The bounce of ‘superball’. International Journal of
   The impact of a cue ball moving with arbitrary ‘English’                         Mechanical Engineering Education 1983;111:57–63.
spins along a rough horizontal surface against a stationary                    [15] Ko PL. The signiﬁcance of shear and normal force components
object ball can be described in terms of a single                                   of tube wear due to fretting and periodic impacting. Wear 1985;106:
                                                                                    261–81.
discontinuous model incorporating effects of inelasticity                      [16] Lewis AD, Rogers RJ. Experimental and numerical study of
and friction in the percussive ball–ball and ball-supporting                        forces during oblique impact. Journal of Sound Vibration 1988;125:
surface events. As a result, a series of velocity-independent                       403–12.
equations relating the post-collision and post-transition                      [17] Garwin R. Kinematics of ultraelastic rough ball. American Journal of
angles of scattering after the impact with the impact angle,                        Physics 1969;37:88–92.
                                                                               [18] Cross R. Grip-slip behaviour of a bouncing ball. American Journal of
the mass ratio and the coefﬁcients of restitution and                               Physics 2002;70:1093–102.
friction is obtained. This includes provisions for different                   [19] Walker J. The physics of the follow, the draw and the massé (in
regimes of impact, including gross slip and slip–stick                              billiards and pools). Scientiﬁc American 1983;249:127–9.
regimes close to those predicted by smooth models. The                         [20] Kondic L. Dynamics of spherical particles on a surface: collision-
scope of this formulation is obviously conditioned by                               induced sliding and other effects. Physical Review E 1999;60:751–70.
                                                                               [21] Dutt M, Behringer RP. Effects of surface friction on a two-
the validity of the simplifying assumptions concerning the                          dimensional granular system: cooling bound system. Physical Review
constancy of the coefﬁcients of restitution and friction and                        E 2004;70:061304–15.
the discontinuous representation of the impact event.                          [22] Marlow WC. Physics of pocket billiards. American Institute of
   In spite of these limitations, the current discontinuous                         Physics; 1994.
approach to two-sphere collisions in billiard-type experi-                     [23] Alciatore DG. The illustrated principles of pool and billiards. New
                                                                                    York: Sterling Publishers; 2004.
ments provides predictions in close agreement with                             [24] Doménech A, Doménech MT. Oblique impact of rolling spheres: a
available experimental data, thus suggesting that there is                          generalization of billiard-ball collisions. Revista Mexicana de Fı́sica
place for a judicious use of that approximation in the                              1998;44:611–8.
context of a discontinuous formulation of the impact.                          [25] Doménech A. A classical experiment revisited: the bounce of balls
                                                                                    and superballs in three dimensions. American Journal of Physics
                                                                                    2005;73:28–36.
References                                                                     [26] Hopkins DC, Patterson JD. Bowling frames: paths of a bowling ball.
                                                                                    American Journal of Physics 1977;45:263–6.
[1] Coriolis G. Théorie mathématique des effects du jeu de billard. Paris:   [27] Walton OR. Numerical simulation of inelastic, frictional particle–
    Carilian-Goeury Librairie; 1835.                                                particle interactions. In: Roco MC, editor. Particluate two-phase
[2] Wallace RE, Schroeder MC. Analysis of billiard ball collisions in two           ﬂow. New York: Butterworth-Heineman; 1992. p. 884–911.
    dimensions. American Journal of Physics 1988;56:815–9.                     [28] Foerster SF, Longe MY, Chang H, Allia K. Measurement of collision
[3] Brach RM. Friction, restitution, and energy loss in planar collisions.          properties of small spheres. Physics of Fluids 1994;6:1108–13.
    ASME Journal of Applied Mechanics 1984;51:164–70.                          [29] Hutchings IM, Macmillan NH, Rickerby DG. Further studies of the
[4] Kane TR, Levinson DA. An explicit solution of the general two-body              oblique impact of hard sphere against a ductile solid. International
    collision problem. Computational Mechanics 1987;2:75–87.                        Journal of Mechanical Sciences 1981;23:639–41.
[5] Smith CE. Predicting rebounds using rigid-body dynamics. ASME              [30] Although this situation may be operative in several instances, such as
    Journal of Applied Mechanics 1991;58:754–8.                                     in the impact of a tennis ball with a rough surface, representation in
[6] Chatterjee A, Ruina A. New algebraic rigid-body collision law                   Fig. 3 obviously overestimates the size of the deformed region in the
    based on impulse space considerations. ASME Journal of Applied                  case of billiard balls, and must be taken merely as a rough view of the
    Mechanics 1998;65:939–51.                                                       impact event.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/numerical_simulations_of_the_frictional_collisions_of_solid_balls_on_a_rough_surface.pdf
title: Numerical Simulations Of The Frictional Collisions Of Solid Balls On A Rough Surface
topics: collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills, robotics_and_computation
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
Sports Eng
DOI 10.1007/s12283-014-0158-y

 ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Numerical simulations of the frictional collisions of solid balls
on a rough surface
S. Mathavan • M. R. Jackson • R. M. Parkin

Ó International Sports Engineering Association 2014

Abstract Three-dimensional simulations of the frictional        List of symbols
collision between solid balls moving on a rough surface are     e     Coefficient of restitution between the balls
analyzed in this paper. The analysis is performed in the        F     Force
context of pool and snooker, two popular games in the           I     Moment of inertia of the balls
pocket billiards family. Accurate simulations of ball           M     Mass of the balls
motion in billiard games are useful for television broad-       N     Number of iterations
casts, training systems and any robotic game playing sys-       P     Accumulated impulse at any time during impact
tems. Studying solid ball collisions in a three-dimensional     PcI   Accumulated impulse at the termination of
space requires careful consideration of the different phe-            compression
nomena involved in ball motion such as rolling, sliding and     PfI   The final accumulated value of impulse
ball spin about a general axis. A set of differential equa-     R     Radius of the balls
tions are derived describing ball dynamics during colli-        s     Slip speed between the balls
sions. In the absence of explicit analytical solutions to the   s0    Slip speed between the cue ball and the table
                                                                  00
differential equations, a numerical procedure is performed      s     Slip speed between the object ball and the table
to determine post-collision ball velocities and spins after     V0 Incident speed of the ball
collision. In addition, the paper also presents a methodol-     W     Work done due to impulse force
ogy to analyze the curved, slip trajectories of balls imme-     x     Ball position on the table along the X-axis
diately after impact. The results presented here, when          y     Ball position on the table along the X-axis
compared with some experimental shots, show that the            z     Ball position on the table along the X-axis
percentile errors in post-collision velocities are reduced by   DP Impulse during a time of Dt
the proposed method. The prediction accuracies for ball         h     The angle that the common normal of the ball–
travel direction are increased twofold by the proposed                cushion contact point makes with the horizontal
impact simulation algorithm.                                    lbb Coefficient of sliding friction between the balls
                                                                ls    Coefficient of sliding friction between the ball and
Keywords Impulse with friction  Frictional impact                   cushion
Solid balls  Billiards  Snooker  Pool  Massè               U     Direction of slip between the balls
                                                                U0    Direction of slip between the cue ball and the table
                                                                U00 Direction of slip between the object ball and the table
S. Mathavan (&)
                                                                x     Angular speed of the ball
ASML Netherlands BV, De Run 6501, 5504, DR, Veldhoven,
The Netherlands                                                 xT0 Topspin of the ball at incidence
e-mail: s.mathavan@ieee.org                                     xS0 Sidespin of the ball at incidence
                                                                x_ r Resistance of the table surface to ball sidespin
M. R. Jackson  R. M. Parkin
Intelligent Automation Research Group, Wolfson School of
Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, Loughborough          Superscripts
University, Loughborough LE11 3UZ, UK                           C Cue ball
                                                                                                                  S. Mathavan et al.

O   Object ball
                                                                      90                                                        90

Subscripts
G Parameters measured about ball centroid                                                                               Soft shot
I   Along normal impulse between the balls                                                                              with top
                                                                                                                        spin
n   Iteration number of numerical simulation
N Common normal at the point of contact between the                                                                     Power
                                                                                                                        shot with
    balls and the table (for forces)                                                           Medium                   top spin
                                                                           Power shot with    powered
Nf Terminal iteration number of numerical simulation                          bottom spin     stun shot
                                                                      90                                                        90

R Along the surface at the point of contact between the
    balls and the table (for frictional forces)
S At the end of the slipping phase of a ball                      Fig. 1 Resulting cue ball locations after a ball-pot for different
                                                                  topspin and sidespin imparted on the cue ball [16]

1 Introduction                                                    variety of ball trajectories giving the players a high level of
                                                                  flexibility (see Fig. 1).
Snooker is a cue sport belonging to the pockets billiards             Nowadays, a vast number of online virtual snooker
family. Another related, popular game is pool. Since the          games are available, e.g., Snooker Skool from Yahoo!
physical and dynamical phenomena involved in both these           Games. Although most of the online games simulate
games are exactly the same, billiard physics and billiard         snooker in 2D, 3-dimensional versions are also found [17].
dynamics are usually employed to refer to these. In addi-         In addition, the TV broadcasts make use of ball tracking
tion, when referring to both games together, the common           systems such as HawkEye [18] that also simulate and
terms ‘pocket billiards’ or simply ‘billiards’ are used           predict ball behavior. Accurate ball collision simulations
throughout this text. The games uniquely combine a high           will make these virtual games and predictions more
level of strategic play and superior physical skill. Interest     realistic.
in snooker has grown steadily in the last few years with an           Traditionally, ball collisions have been analyzed without
exponential growth found in the Far East. Almost half of          incorporating the effect of friction, and the object ball is
the UK’s population watched the World Championship on             supposed to move along the line connecting the ball centers
the BBC in 2011 with as much as 3.9 million people                at the instant of impact [19]. A comprehensive review of
watching a single session, whereas the Chinese television         the existing literature shows that there are two categories of
station CCTV5 reported viewing figures as high as 30              collision models for billiards. The first ones do not take ball
million [1]. Pool is an equally popular game, consisting of       spin into account in the analysis of ball–ball collisions at
a number of variants such as eight-ball, which is very            all. The works of de la Torre Juárez [4] and Wallace and
played very commonly in the United States.                        Schroeder [20] belong to this category. Three other works,
   Pocket billiards has always been associated with physics       Marlow [21], Kondic [22] and Domenech [23], consider
due to the classical nature of concepts such as friction and      the effect of ball spin. Marlow [21] highlights the effects of
collision, associated with it. It is important to note that the   ball spin, but has not proposed a collision model. The work
earliest associated literature is found as early as 1,835 [2].    of Kondic [22] is limited as it only treats the case of head-
A number of publications on billiards dynamics have been          on collisions. Domenech [23] provides a detailed study of
published in the last two decades, e.g., Salazar and San-         billiard ball collisions. The paper clearly identifies the
chez-Lavega [3], de la Torre Juárez [4] and Cross [5, 6]. In     tangential impulse components, which are present due to
addition, recent research has concentrated on robotic bil-        the 3D spins of the balls, under different possible scenarios
liards playing systems [7–10], trainer-assistance systems         at the interfaces between the balls and between the balls
[11–13], and on the development of strategies for game            and the table, e.g., unidirectional slips and different stick–
play [14]. In this context, the work described in this paper      slip regimes. For each of the situations, analytical solutions
is part of a research effort to develop a robotic manipulator     have been given. Moreover, the paper considers the case of
for snooker [15]. Each of these three sets of systems             the cue ball under pure rolling, and no sidespin, colliding
described above has the need to analyze various available         with an object ball, and identifies the evolution of different
shots, for a given table state and select the best next shot      regimes, based on stick and sliding, at the different material
available. The ability to impart different spins and veloci-      interfaces during impact. However, it fails to identify the
ties to the cue ball in combination with some exquisite           evolution of different regimes for a general impact, e.g.,
collision dynamics present between balls results in a             one that involves various levels of top or bottom spin and
Numerical simulations of the frictional collisions

            Y                                                                                                            Z
                                                            X
                                                                                                                                    ωz
                     O
          ω T0                     θ                                    Y ωy
                                                                                                                                             ωx
                                                                                                                 F2
                                       C             ω S0                                           FI
                                                                                                             A            F1                       X
                                                                                                O
                                V0                                                              FNO F1 F                 FI
                                                                                                        2                      C
                                                                                                                         FNC
                                                                                         O                        C
Fig. 2 A general oblique impact between balls (xT0 direction is given
                                                                                     F   R, y    BF
                                                                                                      O
                                                                                                      R, x
                                                                                                             F    R, y             F RC, x
by the right-hand grip rule)
                                                                                                                               D

sidespin, thereby not being able to predict analytical                  Fig. 3 The forces acting on the balls during the impact
solutions for post-collision ball velocities and angles.
   The forgoing literature summary on ball collisions
indicates that there are no generalized collision models
                                                                        theory. However, a point contact is assumed here. The
available, involving ball spin, that can be applied to any
                                                                        assumption of a point contact has also been used by other
given shot in snooker. In the absence of such a model, the
                                                                        researchers such as Kondic [22] and Domenech [23].
best complete model that can predict a given shot is given
                                                                           In this paper, collisions between two snooker balls are
by Wallace and Schroeder [20]. It was shown, in Mathavan
                                                                        studied using the principles of impact mechanics. The next
et al. [24], that there are errors, of up to 6°, in the directions
                                                                        section describes theoretical derivations. Simulation results
of post-collision ball motion predicted by the model of
                                                                        are subsequently presented and discussed extensively, fol-
Wallace and Schroeder [20]. This amount of angular
                                                                        lowed by a conclusion section.
uncertainty is sufficient enough to allow an object ball,
which is as close as 200 mm to a pocket before the colli-
sion, to miss the pocket by a distance of 20 mm. The
                                                                        2 Theory
resulting effect on the cue ball is equally harmful, due to
the unexpected exit angle after collision, as it may end up
                                                                        The balls are assumed to be moving on a flat surface;
in a totally different position on the table. As potting
                                                                        hence, the point of their contact will be at a height of
accuracy and precisely predicting final cue ball positions
                                                                        R from the surface. This is depicted in Fig. 3.
after a shot is of paramount importance in pocket billiards,
the high deviation between the actual and predicted ball
                                                                        2.1 General equations of motion
trajectories will affect the accuracy of the simulated game
play. Therefore, analysis is required regarding the very
                                                                        In Fig. 3, for ball C, for the linear motion along X, Y and Z
general impact between snooker or billiards balls to pro-
                                                                        directions
vide realistic simulations.
                                                                              C
   In the following analysis, initially, a general solution             F1 þ FR;x ¼ M€xCG                                                         ð1aÞ
will be derived for the problem of two identical balls col-                    C
liding obliquely, and at the end, the values applicable for             FI þ FR;y ¼ M€yCG                                                        ð1bÞ
snooker will be substituted. Here, the problem of the cue               F2 þ FNC  mg ¼ M€zCG                                                     ð1cÞ
ball, C, obliquely impinging on to another object ball O is
analyzed (see Fig. 2). Both the cue and object balls are                   Here, F denotes the instantaneous normal force acting
assumed to have equal mass and radius. In Fig. 2, it is                 on any of the points of contact between the balls and the
important to note that ball C does not spin about its frontal           table interface, as shown in Fig. 3. In Eq. (1a), superscripts
axis (about the direction of V0), this condition is only                denote the sphere to which a particular parameter belongs
prevalent during a massé shot and is not normally                      to. The subscript G stands for the centroid values of a
encountered in snooker.                                                 sphere. Thus, €zCG denotes the centroid acceleration of C
   When two spheres collide, a contact is made over a finite            along the Z-axis.
size of area on their surface, due to the deformation present              By considering an infinitesimal time period of Dt, the
at the interface. The contact area between the spheres                  increment and the accumulated impulse values can be
during impact is usually estimated through the Hertz                    expressed as,
                                                                                                               S. Mathavan et al.

       Z
       tþDt                                                       independent variable, instead of the usual variable of time t
DP ¼          F  dt                                      ð2aÞ    [25]. Slip speeds along the X and Z axes, respectively, are
       t
                                                                  as follows:

and,                                                              x_A ¼ x_CA  x_O
                                                                                 A ¼ sðPI Þ cosðUðPI ÞÞ                     ð5aÞ

                  Zt                                              z_A ¼ z_CA  z_O
                                                                                 A ¼ sðPI Þ sinðUðPI ÞÞ                     ð5bÞ
       X
P¼         DP ¼        F  dt                             ð2bÞ       The normal component of relative velocity,
                   0
                                                                  y_A ¼ y_CA  y_O     C     O
                                                                                 A ¼ y_G  y_G                              ð5cÞ
   The impulse–momentum change relationship along the
                                                                     For the nominal slipping speeds to be along the positive
above directions result in the following equations.
                                                                  X and Z axes, when the balls are sliding on each other at
   For cue ball C, at time t, consider an increment Dt in
                                                                  their contact point A, from the Amontons-Coulomb law,
time, from Eqs. (1a) and (2a)
                                                                DP1 ¼ lbb cosðUðPI ÞÞDPI                                 ð6aÞ
DP1 þ DPCx ¼ M x_CG ðt þ DtÞ  x_CG ðtÞ              ð3aÞ
                                                                DP2 ¼ lbb sinðUðPI ÞÞDPI                                 ð6bÞ
DPI þ DPCy ¼ M y_CG ðt þ DtÞ  y_CG ðtÞ             ð3bÞ
                                                                where lbb is the coefficient of sliding friction between the
DP2 þ DPCN ¼ M z_CG ðt þ DtÞ  z_CG ðtÞ              ð3cÞ         balls.
   It should be noted that in Eq. (3c), the impact compo-            Notably, depending on the value of vertical sliding
nent due to gravity acting on the ball, mg, is absent. de la      velocity between the balls, i.e., z_A as given in Eq. (5b),
Juarez [4] suggests that in the limit Dt ? 0, non-diverging       some of the impulses in the equation sets (3a) or (4) will be
forces, such as those due to gravity, will have a negligible      zero. If z_A is negative, ball C will have more downward
contribution on momentum changes.                                 velocity (along the Z-axis) at the contact point A, and the
   Moment of impulse and angular momentum about the               frictional impulse along Z, DP2 , between the balls will be
center of mass for ball C about X, Y and Z directions are         acting on the balls in the directions as shown in Fig. 3. This
given by,                                                         condition is given by,
                                                                DP2 [ 0                                                   ð6cÞ
                    2MR2  C                      
  DP2 þ DPCy R ¼            xx ðt þ DtÞ  xCx ðtÞ      ð3dÞ
                      5                                              If ball C is to remain on the table, from Eq. (3c),
              2MR2 h C                    i                       DP2 þ DPCN \0                                             ð6dÞ
DPCx R ¼           xy ðt þ DtÞ  xCy ðtÞ                 ð3eÞ
                5                                                   The conditions in (6c) and (6d) can only be satisfied
                                                                  when,
              2MR2  C                   
DP1 R ¼            xz ðt þ DtÞ  xCz ðtÞ                 ð3fÞ    DPCN \0                                                   ð6eÞ
                5

   Similar sets of equations can also be derived for ball O.      and apparently, it is impossible to satisfy the condition in
The impulse change of momentum equations equivalent to            (6e) as the table cannot apply a ‘negative’ reaction on the
(3) will be                                                       ball. Thus,
                     O                   
DP1 þ DPO                          O
            x ¼ M x_G ðt þ Dt Þ  x_G ðtÞ                ð4Þ      DPCN ¼ 0                                                  ð6fÞ

   Five other equations, similar to (3b)–(3f) above, can be         Condition (6c) in turn says that the associated frictional
written for the object ball as well. Due to space restrictions,   impulses are also absent, i.e.,
they are omitted here.                                            DPCx ¼ 0 and DPCy ¼ 0                                     ð6gÞ

2.2 Impact dynamics                                                  Here, ball C will lift up from the table, like the cue ball
                                                                  in a ‘jump’ shot; Kondic [22] and Domenech [23] also
At the contact point of the balls, A, relative to ball O, let     acknowledge this effect. However, it is assumed in this
that ball C has a relative speed s(t) at angle U(t) with the X-   paper that during the time of the impulse, it remains at the
axis (the relative velocity vector will lie on the XZ plane).     same spatial location, just above the table, without altering
The instantaneous value of the normal impulse PI (the             the geometrical configuration presented in Fig. 3. This
accumulated value of all DPI s until time t), which is always     assumption is reasonable since the time of impulse between
positive within the interval of impact, monotonously              two balls is very small and is in the range of 0.3 ms [21].
increases with time; thus, in this analysis, it is taken as an       Conversely, if z_A is positive, then,
Numerical simulations of the frictional collisions

DPO        O           O                                             1.    When there is no slip between the balls (i.e., s = 0),
  N ¼ 0; DPx ¼ 0 and DPy ¼ 0                                 ð6hÞ
                                                                           which is a common occurrence depending on the initial
   Finally, if z_A is zero,                                                conditions, as shall be seen shortly, where both the
DP2 ¼ 0                                                      ð6iÞ          spheres will be rolling on each other at their contact
                                                                           point A.
  When (6i) prevails, both the balls will be either in
contact with the table or airborne. Hence,                                 DP1 ¼ DP2 ¼ 0
DPCN ¼ DPO
         N ¼ 0                                               ð6jÞ          consequently,
and the associated friction components will also be zero.                  DPO     O     O
                                                                             N ¼ DPx ¼ DPy ¼ 0
   If ball C is touching the table at any instant during
impact, to satisfy the condition, z_CG ðt þ DtÞ  z_CG ðtÞ ¼ 0 and
                                                                     2.    When s0 = 0, DPCx ¼ DPCy ¼ 0 and ball C will roll on
from (3c)
                                                                           the plane without sliding.
DPCN ¼ DP2 ¼ lbb sinðUðPI ÞÞDPI                             ð7aÞ          When s00 = 0, DPO         O
                                                                     3.                     x ¼ DPy ¼ 0 and ball O will roll on
   Else, if ball O is on the table, to satisfy the condition,              the plane without sliding.
z_O              O
  G ðt þ DtÞ  z_G ðtÞ ¼ 0

it can be shown that                                                 2.2.2 Coefficient of restitution
DPO
  N ¼ DP2 ¼ lbb sinðUðPI ÞÞDPI                              ð7bÞ
                                                                     According to Stronge [25], the energetic coefficient of
   If ball C touches the table at point D with the table             restitution e, is independent of friction and the process of
plane, slip s0 and slip angle U0 with the X-axis (s0 will lie on     slip. e2 is the negative of the ratio of the work done by the
the XY plane), and from (7a), for the sliding condition,             impulse force during the restitution phase to that during the
DPCx ¼ ls cosðU0 ðPI ÞÞDPCN                                         compression phase. Let PfI ; PcI denote the accumulated
     ¼ lbb ls sinðUðPI ÞÞ cosðU0 ðPI ÞÞDPI                  ð8aÞ    impulse at the termination of impulse and at the end of
                                                                     compression, respectively. Then, it is possible to show that
   Similar expressions can be derived for along the Y-axis
                                                                     the work done is
and those for ball O along X and Y involving slip s00 and                     Z             Z
slip angle U00 with the X-axis (s00 will be on the XY plane).        DWy ¼ FI :y_A dt ¼ y_A dPI                              ð10aÞ
Let these be denoted by (8b)–(8d).
   Here, ls is the sliding friction coefficient between the             The coefficient of restitution is given by,
balls and the table. Sliding speeds are                                     R Pf
                                                                           PcI y_A dPI
x_D ¼ x_CD ¼ s0 ðPI Þ cosðU0 ðPI ÞÞ                          ð9aÞ    e2 ¼ R Pc I                                            ð10bÞ
                                                                            0 y_A dPI
                                                                              I

y_D ¼ y_CD ¼ s0 ðPI Þ sinðU0 ðPI ÞÞ                          ð9bÞ
                                                                       This can be rearranged as,
   Or                                                                                 
             00          00                                          Wy PfI ¼ 1  e2 Wy PcI                                 ð10cÞ
x_B ¼ x_O
        B ¼ s ðPI Þ cosðU ðPI ÞÞ                             ð9cÞ
y_B ¼ y_O    00          00                                              The termination of compression occurs when the normal
        B ¼ s ðPI Þ sinðU ðPI ÞÞ                             ð9dÞ
                                                                     component of relative velocity becomes zero, i.e.,
   Hereafter, the practice of having the independent var-                
                                                                     y_A PcI ¼ 0                                         ð10dÞ
iable PI with the dependent variables is dropped to keep
the equations compact, e.g., s0 ðPI Þ this is simply written         2.3 Velocity relationships
as s0 .
                                                                     The velocity of any point on a sphere’s surface can be
2.2.1 Conditions for rolling                                         written with respect to its centroidal velocity, in vectorial
                                                                     notation as,
When rolling occurs, slip speed s (or s0 and s0 for the sliding
                                                                     *
on the table) becomes zero. At this instance, the relative             ~G þx
                                                                     V¼V     ~
                                                                           ~KR                                              ð11aÞ
motion between bodies stops at their contact point along
the common tangent. The frictional forces become null.                    At contact point A
                                                                                                                                 S. Mathavan et al.

                                                                     O                 O        O       
x_CA ¼ x_CG  RxCz ; z_CA ¼ z_CG þ RxCx ; x_O     O     O
                                            A ¼ x_G þ Rxz and        x_G 1 ¼ 0; y_O                              O
                                                                                  G 1 ¼ 0; z_G 1 ¼ 0; xx 1 ¼ 0; xy   ¼ 0;
                                                                                                                   1
z_O     O     O                                                      O
  A ¼ z_G  Rxx                                                      xz 1 ¼ 0:
                                                            ð11bÞ
                                                                                                                                               ð13cÞ
  Similar expressions can be derived at D and B for the
                                                                       Also,
cue and object ball, respectively.                                             qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
  Using                                                                                                         2                          2
                                                                    s ð 0Þ ¼       V0 sin h  RxS0 þ RxT0 cos h and Uð0Þ
  *
     ~G þDx
DV ¼DV    ~~
            R                                               ð11cÞ                            RxT0 cos h
                                                                         ¼ tan1 
the finite difference counterparts of these equations are as                               V0 sin h  RxS0
follows:                                                                                                                                       ð13dÞ
Dx_CA ¼ Dx_CG  RDxCz ; Dz_CA ¼ Dz_CG þ RDxCx ; Dx_O
                                                   A                   Between ball O and the table,
      ¼ Dx_OG þ RDx O
                    z  and   Dz_O
                                A ¼  D _
                                       z O
                                         G  RDx O
                                                 x          ð11dÞ   s0 ð0Þ ¼ 0:                                                                ð13eÞ
Dx_CD ¼ Dx_CG  RDxCy and Dy_CD ¼ Dy_CG þ RDxCx             ð11eÞ      Between ball C and the table,
Dx_O      O      O        O      O      O
   B ¼ Dx_G  RDxy and Dy_B ¼ Dy_G þ RDxx                   ð11fÞ   s00 ð0Þ ¼ V0  RxT0 and U00 ð0Þ ¼ 0:                                        ð13fÞ

2.4 Solution for the ball velocities                                2.4.2 The values of friction and restitution coefficients

Using the expression in the previous sections, and                  Here, the values of the friction coefficients between the
depending on which ball is airborne (i.e., whether DPO              balls, lbb, and that between the balls and the table, ls, and the
                                                          C ¼ 0
or, i.e., DPO  ¼  0), two  sets   of 12   differential equations    coefficient of restitution between the ball, e, are determined.
             N
(DEs) can be derived. Moreover, another set of 12 DEs can           The authors determined the sliding coefficient of friction
be expressed for the condition of DP2 ¼ 0, where both the           between the balls and table (ls) in snooker as between 0.178
balls stay on the table or both are airborne. None of these 3       and 0.245; see [24]. The average value of 0.21 for ls is used
sets of DEs have exact solutions. A numerical solution is           for simulations. The values for lbb and e parameters pre-
still possible. For example, for the problem of rotating            sented in the literature are vague. Only Marlow [21] has been
spheres colliding into each other in free space, Kane and           found to report about these. Marlow predicts a value of 0.06
Levinson [26] have used a numerical scheme to obtain the            for lbb for well-polished balls. Furthermore, when the balls
variation of the sliding velocities, etc., during the time of       have any foreign material, such as chalk, on their surface,
impact, for both the spheres. A numerical solution is sought        according to Marlow lbb may be as high as 0.2. Contradic-
in this paper additionally.                                         torily, a variation of lbb in the form of,
    The work done during an increment of the normal                 lbb ¼ 9:951  103 þ 0:108e1:088s
impulse between the balls, DPI , must also be calculated
                                                                    is also put forward by Marlow [21], where s denotes the
numerically, using Eq. (10a),
                                                                  slip speed between the balls. The experimental process in
                      ðy_A Þnþ1 þðy_A Þn                        obtaining the aforesaid variation did not seem reliable
 Wy nþ1  Wy n ¼ DPI                                        ð12Þ
                                   2                                enough. According to Marlow, e is greater than 0.92. It is
   See Sect. 2.4.3 on the explanation on the numerical              believed that the high speed camera measurements taken
scheme employed.                                                    by these authors, and partly described in Mathavan et al.
                                                                    [24], are far superior to the techniques used by Marlow
2.4.1 Initial conditions                                            [21], and these results are used for the calculations and
                                                                    simulations performed.
When PI = 0, the centroidal velocities of ball C,                       The experimental plot shown in Fig. 4 is used in con-
 C                                                            junction with these numerical simulations to obtain the
 x_G 1 ¼ V0 sin h; y_CG 1 ¼ V0 cos h; z_CG 1 ¼ 0;           ð13aÞ   values of the coefficient of restitution and the value of
with the rotational speeds being,                                   sliding friction. The fundamental idea is to replicate the
 C                                                            experimental results by numerical simulations, using two
 xx 1 ¼ xT0 cos h; xCy ¼ xT0 sin h; xCz 1 ¼ xS0 :                  random numerical values for the above parameters by a
                             1
                                                                    trial-and-error procedure. The experimental plot shown in
                                                            ð13bÞ
                                                                    Fig. 4 was obtained under the conditions of cut angle (h),
   For ball O, the centroidal velocities are as follows:            sidespin (xS0 ) and topspin (xT0 ) assuming the values of, 0°,
Numerical simulations of the frictional collisions

                           2.5
                                   Experimental                                                                             ω2
 Object ball speed (m/s)

                            2      Numerically simulated
                                                                                                          ω1
                           1.5
                                                                                                    V
                            1                                                                                          O           ω3

                           0.5

                                                                                   Fig. 5 A ball that spins about its frontal velocity axis
                            0
                             0.5          1                1.5           2   2.5

                                                  Cue ball speed (m/s)             impulse had ball O been a solid wall. Hence, for N
Fig. 4 Experimental results and numerical predictions for lbb = 0.05
                                                                                   iterations,
and e = 0.89 and under the conditions of h ¼ 0 ; xS0 ¼ 0, and                             ð1 þ e ÞMV0 cos h
xT0 ¼ VR0                                                                          DPI ¼                                                      ð14Þ
                                                                                                   N
                                                                                      Clearly, the values of final and end of compression
0 and VR0 , respectively (see Fig. 2). For each of the incident                    phase impulse values (PcI and PfI ) will decide the actual
speed values, V0, given in Fig. 4, the value of centroid                           number of iterations that have taken place in the scheme.
velocity of the object ball at the termination of impact,                             For each iteration of the scheme, the state of the balls is
     
y_O   f                                                                            determined at contact points A, B and D, i.e., it is determined
  G PI , was found numerically for the restitution coeffi-
                                                                                   whether they are in the state of rolling or sliding, which balls
cient between the balls, e, in the range 0.7–1.0 and the
                                                                                   are airborne, etc. For this purpose, the equations Sect. 2.2 are
friction coefficient (lbb) between 0 and 0.2, both in 0.01
                                                                                   used. Then, for each increase of DPI , i.e., normal impulse
increments. For given values of friction and restitution
                                                                                   between the balls, the code initially starts by calculating the
coefficients between the balls, i.e., lbb and e, the RMS
                                                                                   increments in the impulses that determine the changes in
value of all the errors between the experimental and the
                                                                                   velocity components for both the balls; equation sets (3) and
numerical values for each of the incident velocities given
                                                                                   (4) are used. Consequently, velocity increments are esti-
in Fig. 4 was obtained. The values of a ball–ball friction
                                                                                   mated followed by the determination of new ball velocities,
value (lbb) of 0.05 and a restitution coefficient (e) of 0.89
                                                                                   both linear and rotational. The increment in work done is
were found to have the least RMS error value. The
                                                                                   also estimated using Eq. (12). Now, state of motion at points
agreement of these values with Marlow’s [21] values of
                                                                                   A, B and D are evaluated and the scheme is continued until
0.06 and 0.92 should be noted. Figure 4 also includes the
                                                                                   the normal relative velocity between the balls, y_A —as in Eq.
numerically predicated results for a lbb of 0.05 and an e of
                                                                                   (5c)—becomes negative, i.e., the termination of the com-
0.89.                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                   pression phase. The work done up to this iteration is Wy PcI .
                                                                                                                              
2.4.3 Numerical algorithm                                                          Equation (10c) is used to determine Wy PfI . The numerical
                                                                                   algorithm is stopped when,
For snooker balls, the mass, M, and radius, R, are                                          
0.1406 kg and 26.25 mm, respectively. The numerical                                W ¼ Wy PfI :                                               ð15Þ
scheme is written in MATLABÒ programming language.
                                                                                   2.5 Parabolic path subsequent to impact
The values of initial cue ball velocities (V0, xT0 ; xS0 ) and
the angle of collision, h, are the inputs to the scheme. The
                                                                                   Execution of the numerical scheme that is described in
smaller the value of the increment in the normal impulse
                                                                                   Sect. 2.4.2 shows that, in general, both the cue ball and the
between the balls PI, i.e., DPI , which is chosen as the
                                                                                   object ball will have spins about their frontal velocity axes,
independent variable for this problem, the more accurate
                                                                                   as shown in Fig. 5. The ball shown in Fig. 5 has a spin
the results will be. The aim is to find the centroid
                                                                                   component of x1 about its centroid velocity V. In this case,
velocities of the balls at the final accumulated impulse
                                                                                   irrespective of the other two spin components, the ball will
value PfI .                                                                        move along a curved path. This is called massé in billiards
   In order to assume a reasonable value for increment of                          [21]. Curved shots can be made by elevating the cue when
the normal impulse between the balls, DPI , to start the                           striking the ball. Curved ball trajectories are also produced
numerical scheme, an approximate value for PfI can be                              due to frictional percussions during the impact between
taken as ð1 þ eÞMV0 cos h, which is the value of the                               two balls or that between a ball and a cushion. The second
                                                                                                                S. Mathavan et al.

                                                                    The sliding can be shown to stop at time Ts, given by,
                         λ                                                 0
                                                                         2sNf
                                        YV’
                                                  X’              TS ¼                                                         ð19Þ
                                                                         7ls
          Y
                                 YS ’                  X          when the ball is at S (see Fig. 6) or the coordinate (Xs0 Ys0 )
                                              ψ                                                 0
                         S                                        in the X0 Y0 system (where sNf is the slip velocity of O, on
     Y’                                                           the table, at the termination of impact, obtained at the final
                                                                  iteration of the numerical scheme). Using the derivations of
                                                                  Hopkins and Patterson [27], and also using Eq. (18), it is
                                        XS’ XV’                   possible to develop the expressions for Xs0 and Ys0 , together
                                                                  with the velocity components X_ S0 and Y_S0 at the end of the
                                                                  slipping process.
Fig. 6 Curved path of object ball O                                  The final velocity at S,
                                                                       2  2
                                                                  VS ¼ X_ S0 þ Y_S0                                           ð20aÞ
type is of interest here. However, the derivations given in
this section are, essentially, applicable for any general            At an angle of hS with respect to the XY coordinates,
curved shot.                                                      given by,
   Here, the example of the object ball O is used to derive,                                     !
                                                                                       1 YS
                                                                                            _0
with appropriate symbols, the description of trajectory of        hS ¼ w þ k ¼ w þ tan                              ð20bÞ
the ball under the massé conditions. The effect of table                                  X_ S0
friction will generally impart a spin about the velocity axis        Equations (20a) and (20b) completely define the post-
of the object ball, as in a spinning bullet. This will curve      slip motion of the ball, except its sidespin. The sidespin of
the path of ball O immediately after the termination of           the ball immediately after impact is also estimated using
impact, making the final direction of movement different to       the numerical algorithm.
that at the termination of impulse. Its effect will be very          The following describes the instantaneous value of
prominent for high values of lbb . In mathematical terms, at      sidespin at the end of slip (t ¼ TS ),
the termination of impact, when n is equal to Nf, the final
                                                                                                                   O
step of the numerical algorithm, this condition for curving                 O               O                  x z Nf
                                                                    O
is created when                                                   xz ðtÞ ¼ xz Nf x_ r t; if xz Nf [ 0 and t\
                                                                                                                     x_ r
 0
UNf ¼ bNf                                                  ð16Þ
                                                                                                                              ð21aÞ
                                                                                                                        
   Here bNf denotes the direction of its velocity of the                   O                                      xO
                                                                                                                       z Nf
center of gravity of ball O (i.e.,), given by                     xO              _ r t; if xO
                                                                   z ðtÞ ¼ xz Nf þx          z Nf \0 and t\
           O                                                                                                         x_ r
           y_G N
tan bNf ¼  O  f                                   ð17Þ                                                                      ð21bÞ
           x_G Nf                                                                             
                                                                                           xO
                                                                                            z Nf
and U0 being the direction of slip on the table. The sub-         xO
                                                                   z ðtÞ ¼ 0; if t                                           ð21cÞ
                                                                                            x_ r
sequent curved path of the ball can be shown to describe a
parabola, conveniently expressed in the X0 Y0 coordinate             x_ r is the resistance of the table to sidespin of the
system, which is rotated from XY axes by w (see Fig. 6).          ball, which was measured by the first author to be
Where                                                             22 rad/s2 for snooker balls [15]. It should also be noted
                 1                                                that clockwise rotation of the ball (i.e., right-spin), as
tan w ¼                                                   ð18Þ   seen when looked down at the table, is taken as
              tan U0Nf
                                                                  positive. While the ball is still under the slipping
U0Nf is obtained from the numerical algorithm explained in        process, its velocity and spin conditions are also
Sect. 2.4.3. Expressions for XV0 and YV0 have been derived        available from the work of Hopkins and Patterson [27].
in the detailed analysis of Hopkins and Patterson [27] on         In addition, the ball’s sidespin can still be estimated
the curved path of a bowling ball.                                using Eq. (21a).
Numerical simulations of the frictional collisions

Table 1 Theoretical                    Cue ball        Topspin         Cut         Meas. vS     Meas. vS     Predict. vS   Predict. vS   Error in     Error in vS
predictions, assuming zero             velocity        xT0 (rad/       angle       for cue      for object   for cue       for object    vS for cue   for object
sidespin (xS0 ), and experimental      V0 (m/s)        s)              h (°)       ball (m/s)   ball (m/s)   ball (m/s)    ball (m/s)    ball (%)     ball (%)
results of ball speeds
                                       1.539           58.63           33.83       0.816        0.836        0.914         0.831         10.70        –0.62
                                       1.032           39.31           26.36       0.52         0.629        0.520         0.599         –0.03        –5.00
                                       1.364           51.96           40.52       0.925        0.7          0.917         0.676         –0.90        –3.52
                                       1.731           65.94           46.5        1.275        0.787        0.128         0.780          0.18        –0.94
                                       0.942           35.89           18.05       0.365        0.581        0.383         0.579          4.81        –0.38

             14.0                      Cue ball - proposed method                         the impact algorithm presented in this paper. A comparison
                                       Cue ball - Wallace & Schroeder
             12.0                      Object ball - proposed method                      of the results, presented in Table 1, with that obtained
                                       Object ball - Wallace & Schroeder                  through the predictions of Wallace and Schroeder [20], as
             10.0
                                                                                          given in Mathavan et al. [24], shows that percentile errors
              8.0
                                                                                          are one order lower with the predictions presented in the
 Error (%)

              6.0
                                                                                          paper (also seen in Fig. 7). Snooker is a game where the
              4.0
                                                                                          object is not only to pot the object ball, but also to leave the
              2.0                                                                         cue ball in a position advantageous for any subsequent
              0.0                                                                         shots. So, the post-impact velocity of the cue ball velocity
                    0   1   2           3          4               5           6
             -2.0                                                                         is important in predicting its subsequent position on the
             -4.0                                                                         table. Hence, from a billiard robot perspective, the algo-
             -6.0                                                                         rithm presented in this paper provides a superior ball
                                    Shot number                                           position predictor for the cue ball.
                                                                                             For the shots given in Table 1, the results of the pre-
Fig. 7 Comparison of the prediction errors for the five shots for the
cue and object ball speeds, Vs, by the proposed method and that of                        dicted and measured angles are presented in Table 2. All
Wallace and Schroeder [20]                                                                predicted angles are benchmarked against the measured
                                                                                          angles for the five shots. When compared with the pre-
                                                                                          dictions that do not consider ball spin [20, 24], the analysis
3 Results and discussion                                                                  performed in this work reduces the error in the cue ball exit
                                                                                          angles by up to six times, as shown in Fig. 8. The error in
Five experimental snooker shots, involving ball collisions,                               object ball exit angles is reduced from 9–12 % as presented
presented in Mathavan et al. [24] are revisited here to                                   in Mathavan et al. [24] to just under 5 % as given in
check the accuracy obtained through the methodology                                       Table 2 and Fig. 8. For a realistic billiards simulation, the
given in this paper. The authors used an overhead, high                                   object ball exit angle is of utmost importance as it directly
speed camera to track the balls with a 1-mm resolution and                                affects the potting accuracy. The foregoing error reductions
0.25-mm accuracy on the table [24]. An experimental                                       in cue and object ball exit angles show that the model
procedure was devised, based on the velocity–time plots                                   incorporating the effects of spin predict the collisions better
for the cue ball, before the impacts, with only the shots that                            than the ones that do not take spin into account.
had the cue ball rolling before the impacts. Here, the top-                                  Even though the prediction errors have reduced when
spin, xT0 , is equal to the frontal ball velocity divided by the                          compared to methods that do not consider ball spin, a
ball radius, i.e., VR0 . However, the sidespins of the cue ball                           considerable amount of error still remains. In order to
before the collisions could not be measured [24]. The                                     quantify the measurement inaccuracies with the experi-
sidespin values of the cue ball at impact, on the other hand,                             mental procedure, an estimation of the associated errors is
are considered to be very low as the cue ball was hit on the                              performed here. Given that the ball tracking accuracy of
great circle that is coplanar with the cueing direction as                                the camera system is 0.25 mm, and that the ball collision
much as possible. Table 1, below, shows the simulated and                                 experiments were performed with 45 frames per second
measured values of the ball velocities at the end of the                                  (fps) acquisition [24], the accuracy of velocity measure-
slipping phase after impacts (i.e., VS). The data that are                                ments is 0.011 m/s. Consequently, for the velocities in the
used in this section, and the methodology adopted to obtain                               range of 0.94–1.73 m/s, for the five experimental shots, the
it, are presented in a greater detail [24].                                               measurements ambiguities will be in the order of 0.5–1 %
    The five experimental shots, for which the data were                                  with slower shots more prone to the measurement of error.
presented in Mathavan et al. [24], are also simulated with                                Hence, in the velocity prediction errors of up to ±5 % with
                                                                                                                                         S. Mathavan et al.

Table 2 Theoretical                     Cue ball     Topspin       Cut         Meas.        Meas. exit   Predict.     Predict.      Error in     Error in
predictions, assuming zero              velocity     xT0 (rad/s)   angle       exit         angle for    exit angle   exit angle    exit angle   exit angle
sidespin (xS0 ), and experimental       V0 (m/s)                   h (°)       angle for    object       for cue      for object    for cue      for object
results of ball exit angles                                                    cue ball     ball (°)     ball (°)     ball (°)      ball (%)     ball (%)
                                                                               (°)

                                        1.539        58.63         33.83       35.96        33.83        31.93        32.20         –11.21       –4.81
                                        1.032        39.31         26.36       33.20        26.36        32.45        25.07          –2.27       –4.91
                                        1.364        51.96         40.52       30.50        40.51        29.91        38.62          –0.90       –4.67
                                        1.731        65.94         46.5        27.97        46.50        27.32        44.38          –2.34       –4.57
                                        0.942        35.89         18.05       29.86        18.05        29.47        17.15          –1.31       –4.99

                                                                                    of dynamics of spheres rolling on a flat surface and
                                    Cue ball - proposed method
                                    Cue ball - Wallace & Schroeder                  general frictional impact dynamics under the assumption
            15.0                    Object ball - proposed method                   of point contacts between the balls under collision and
                                    Object ball - Wallace & Schroeder
                                                                                    that of the table. Spin dynamics are extensively consid-
            10.0                                                                    ered. Finally, quantification is provided for the slipping
                                                                                    phases of the ball after impact. Exit velocities and angles
             5.0                                                                    immediately after impact, which heavily depend on the
Error (%)

                                                                                    spin dynamics, are predicted for the first time and then
             0.0                                                                    compared with some experimental shots. The improved
                    0   1    2           3          4          5           6        prediction accuracies clearly indicate the superiority of
             -5.0                                                                   this spin model to the current models that do not con-
                                                                                    sider the effects of ball spin on impact. These predictions
            -10.0                                                                   presented here will be useful for robotic and other virtual
                                                                                    systems that are designed to play snooker and billiards,
            -15.0                                                                   in general.
                                    Shot number

Fig. 8 Comparison of the prediction errors for the five shots for the
cue and object ball exit angles by the proposed method and that of
Wallace and Schroeder [20]                                                          References

                                                                                       1. World Snooker (2012) http://www.worldsnooker.com/page/
                                                                                          NewsArticles/013165*2352434,00.html. Last accessed on the
                                                                                          11th of November 2012 at 19:26 hours (GMT)
the proposed method (Fig. 7), a considerable portion must                              2. Coriolis G-G (1835) Théorie Mathémathique des Effets du Jeu de
emanate from the theory, mainly from the assumptions                                      Billard (Carilian-Goeury, Paris, 1835) translated by David Nadler
made in the form of point contacts and negligible cushion                                 [Mathematical Theory of Spin, Friction, and Collision in the
deformations. As far as the angles are considered, at least                               Game of Billiards (David Nadler, USA, 2005)]
                                                                                       3. Salazar A, Sanchez-Lavega A (1990) Motion of a ball on a rough
4–5 successive ball locations were used to derive the exit                                horizontal surface after being struck by a tapering rod. Eur J Phys
angles [24], involving a distance of 150–200 mm, and                                      11:228–232
given the 0.25 mm accuracy of the vision system, the                                   4. de la Torre Juárez M (1994) The effect of impulsive forces on a
angular errors will be less than 0.1°. Hence, the errors                                  system with friction: the example of the billiard game. Eur J Phys
                                                                                          15(4):184–190
found for the exit angles in Table 2 and Fig. 8 must be                                5. Cross R (2005) Bounce of a spinning ball near normal incidence.
solely attributed to the theoretical assumptions made at the                              Am J Phys 73(10):914–992
start of the paper.                                                                    6. Cross R (2012) Rolling motion of a ball spinning about a near-
                                                                                          vertical axis. Phys Teach 50:25–27
                                                                                       7. Long F, Herland J, Tessier M-C, Naulls D, Roth A, Roth G,
                                                                                          Greenspan M (2004) Robotic pool: an experiment in automatic
4 Conclusions                                                                             potting. In Proceedings of the IROS’04: IEEE/RSJ international
                                                                                          conference on intelligent robotics and systems, Sendai, Japan, 3:
This paper provides a comprehensive methodology                                           2520–2525
                                                                                       8. Ho KHL, Martin T, Baldwin J (2007) Snooker robot player—
whereby motion characteristics after a collision between                                  20 years on. In Proceedings of the IEEE symposium on compu-
two balls, moving on a plane, can be predicted. The                                       tational intelligence and games (CIG 2007), Hawaii, 1–5 April
algorithms presented here make use of general theories                                    2007:1–8
Numerical simulations of the frictional collisions

 9. Cheng B-R, Li J-T, Yang, J-S (2004) Design of the neural-fuzzy        17. Nolan A (2006) The development and implementation of an
    compensator for a billiard robot. In Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE         interactive snooker game. Bachelor Degree Thesis, The Univer-
    international conference on networking, sensing and control,              sity of Bath, UK. Last accessed from http://www.cs.bath.ac.uk/
    Taipei, Taiwan, 21–23 March 2004:909–913                                  *mdv/courses/CM30082/projects.bho/2005-6/nolan-ap-disserta
10. Alian ME, Shouraki SE, Shalmani MTM, Karimian P, Sabz-                    tion-2005-6.pdf on the 11 of November 2012 20:19 hours (GMT)
    meydani P (2004) Roboshark: a gantry pool player. In Proceed-         18. Bal B, Dureja G (2012) Hawk eye: a logical innovative tech-
    ings of the 35th international symposium on robotics (ISR), Paris,        nology use in sports for effective decision making. Sport Sci Rev
    France, 2004                                                              1–2:107–119
11. Jebara T, Eyster C, Weaver J, Starner T, Pentland A (1997)            19. Bayes JH, Scott WT (1962) Billiard-ball collision experiment.
    Stochasticks: augmenting the billiards experience with probabi-           Am J Phys 3(31):197–200
    listic vision and wearable computer. In Proceedings of the IEEE       20. Wallace RE, Schroeder MC (1988) Analysis of billiard ball
    international symposium on wearable computers, Cambridge,                 collisions in two dimensions. Am J Phys 56(9):815–819
    MA, October 1997:138–145                                              21. Marlow WC (1994) The physics of pocket billiards _MAST.
12. Larsen LB, Jensen MD, Vodzi WK (2012) Multi modal user                    Palm Beach Gardens, Florida
    interaction in an automatic pool trainer. In: Proceedings of the      22. Kondic L (1999) Dynamics of spherical particles on a surface:
    fourth IEEE international conference on multimodal interfaces             collison-induced sliding and other effects. Phys Rev E
    (ICMI’02), Pittsburgh, USA, pp 361–366, 14–16 October 2002                60(1):751–770
13. Uchiyama H, Saito H (2007) AR display of visual aids for sup-         23. Doménech A (2008) Non-smooth modelling of billiard- and super
    porting pool games by online markerless tracking. In Proceedings          billiard-ball collisions. Int J Mech Sci 50(4):752–763
    of the 17th international conference on artificial reality and tel-   24. Mathavan S, Jackson MR, Parkin RM (2009) Application of
    existence (ICAT 2007), Esbjerg, Denmark, 28–30 November                   high-speed imaging in determining the dynamics involved in
    2007: 172–179                                                             billiards. Am J Phys 77(9):788–794
14. Hoferlin M, Grundy E, Borgo R, Weiskopf D, Chen M, Griffiths          25. Stronge WJ (2000) Impact mechanics. Cambridge University
    IW, Griffiths W (2010) Video visualization for snooker skill              Press, Cambridge
    training. Comput Graph Forum 29(3):1053–1062                          26. Kane TR, Levinson DA (1987) An explicit solution of the general
15. Mathavan S (2009) Trajectory solutions for a game-playing robot           two-body collision problem. Comput Mech 2:75–87
    using non-prehensile manipulation methods and machine vision.         27. Hopkins DC, Patterson JD (1977) Bowling frames: paths of a
    PhD Thesis, Loughborough University, Loughborough, UK                     bowling ball. Am J Phys 45:263–266
16. Mathavan S, Jackson MR, Parkin RM (2010) A theoretical ana-
    lysis of billiard ball dynamics under cushion impacts. In: Pro-
    ceedings of the IMechE, Part C. Journal of Mechanical
    Engineering Science, vol 224, no 9, pp 1863–1873
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/optimal_cue_weight.pdf
title: Optimal Cue Weight
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Optimal Cue Weight”                                                         ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

    Pool players on the online forums and Facebook often ask: What is the best weight for a playing cue?
Or: Is there an optimal weight for a break cue? I will attempt to address these questions in this article.

     For your main playing cue, you should use whatever weight feels most comfortable. Different weights
can produce slightly different results; but with practice, one can get accustomed to a cue of any weight. You
will learn to adjust your stroke as necessary to achieve the range of cue speeds appropriate for different
shots. The only shots for which cue weight can make a significant different are power shots (e.g., an extreme
power draw, or the break shot), as discussed later in the article.

     In general, a lighter cue will allow more control over finesse shots, and a heavier cue will allow more cue
ball (CB) speed with less apparent stroke effort. A heavier cue might also be easier for some people to keep
on line during the stroke, but this is a very individual thing. Also, a heavier cue might tend to have a shaft with
more endmass (the weight of the portion of the shaft closest to the tip); although, this isn't necessarily the
case. If it is, the heavier cue will create more squirt (AKA "cue ball deflection"), which can have both
advantages and disadvantages for different people. For more information, see the “squirt endmass” and “low-
squirt (AKA low CB deflection or LD) shaft advantages and disadvantages” resource pages in the FAQ
section at billiards.colostate.edu.

     Another potential pitfall with a heavy cue is that it could result in double hits, pushes, or miscues at large
tip offsets from center. When using a very heavy and/or stiff cue, the maximum tip offset (and maximum spin)
possible with a good hit can be more limiting than normal. As shown in the plots on pages 7 and 8 in TP
A.30, with a hit close to the miscue limit using a heavy cue, the CB might not separate from the tip fast
enough. Also, with a stiff shaft (e.g., a carbon fiber shaft) the end of the cue won't deflect away from the ball
as much as normal and will tend to flex back toward the CB faster. These effects can result in a double hit or
push that might not even be directly noticeable; although, the CB will squirt more than expected (as with a
miscue shot). In HSV A.106, the 2nd-to-last shot (before the miscue) visually shows how close the tip can
come to a double hit even with a typical-weight LD shaft, which is not very heavy or stiff. For more info, see
the “maximum english” and “cue vibration” resource pages in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.

    For a break cue, the optimal weight for maximum cue ball (CB) speed will depend on your arm anatomy
(the size and weights of the different parts of your arm), muscle physiology (whether you muscle fiber
dominance is fast-twitch or slow-twitch), technique, and timing. The only way to find out the optimal weight for
sure is to experiment. Cue weight is not just a question of physics. Physiology also comes into play. Some
people have more fast-twitch muscle fibers than others. Because of this, cue weight selection can be a very
personal thing.

     What determines the CB speed is the cue's mass and the cue's speed at impact with the ball, and CB
speed is what we are striving for on the break (in addition to accuracy). For a given cue speed, if the cue has
more mass, the CB will go faster; and for a given cue mass, if the cue has more speed, the CB will go faster.
Both factors (cue speed and cue mass) are important. Some people can generate more breaking power with
a lighter cue, and some can generate more with a heavier cue. A detailed analysis of the physics of how CB
speed varies with both cue mass and speed (and tip offset from center, and tip efficiency) can be found in TP
A.30. Breaking power is related to the square of CB speed, and CB speed is directly related to cue speed, so
if you can increase the speed of your break stroke while maintaining accuracy, it can result in a big
improvement in break effectiveness. And if you can also use a heavier cue, and maintain the same or similar
cue speed, you can also increase breaking power; although, increases in cue weight don't have as large of a
benefit as increases in cue speed.

   Cue and tip efficiency can also affect breaking performance. Based on the numbers in TP A.30,
changing from a medium-hardness leather tip on a typical playing cue (with a typical “coefficient of restitution”

Billiards Digest                                                                                      October, 2015
or COR of 0.73) to a phenolic tip on a break cue (with a COR as high as 0.87), can increase breaking power
by 17%! For comparison purposes (see the end of TP A.30 for details), if you could increase your cue speed
by 10%, the cue ball speed would also increase by 10%, and the effective increase in breaking power would
be 21%. And for a given cue speed, if you could increase the cue weight from 17 to 22 oz (while maintaining
the same speed), the cue ball speed would increase by 6.3%, which would correspond to an effective
increase in breaking power of 13%. So with a dramatic increase in cue weight (17 oz to 22 oz), the benefit is
not as large as one might expect, even if the heavier cue could be stroked at the same speed as the lighter
cue (which is usually not the case).

    As mentioned above, the optimal cue weight for each individual, providing the best combination of cue
speed and weight to produce the best breaking power, is a very personal thing. The only way to determine
the optimal weight is to experiment. And even if you are using the optimal-weight cue and are generating the
most cue speed possible, none of that will matter if you are not using good technique to get a square hit on
the lead ball or if you are getting too much unintentional sidespin or CB hop. You should only use as much
speed as you can control.

     A good analogy to pool break cue weight selection is baseball bat weight selection. A lighter bat can be
swung faster, but a heavier bat has more mass. Some players can generate more ball speed (and distance)
with a heavier bat (e.g., Babe Ruth), and some do better with a much lighter bat (e.g., Barry Bonds). An
excellent    webpage       dealing    with   baseball     bat   weight     effects   can     be    found     at:
http://www.acs.psu.edu/drussell/bats/batw8.html. Graphs about 3/4 down the page show how maximum
possible ball speed varies with bat weight. The curves are very flat at the optimal weight, implying bat weight
doesn't really make that much difference in the range of typical values. This effect should be similar with
break cues. If you are in your preferred weight range, an ounce more or less shouldn't make much difference.

     Diagram 1 illustrates how the maximum CB speed you can generate might vary with cue weight. This is
similar to the graphs for the optimal bat weight in baseball. The black curve shows how performance might
vary for a typical person. With a very light cue, the maximum CB speed possible will be lower than what is
possible with a heavier cue. And for a cue that is too heavy, the maximum possible CB speed will also be
limited. There will be an optimal weight range where the break speeds can be the highest (see “optimal break
cue weight” in the graph). The blue and red curves show how things might vary with muscle physiology. For
a person with predominantly fast-twitch muscle fibers (e.g., sprinters, jumpers, and fast baseball-bat
swingers), the optimal cue weight will usually be lighter. And for a person with predominantly slow-twitch
muscle fibers (e.g., distance runners and slow/powerful baseball-bat swingers), a heavier cue weight will
usually be more effective. But again, since the CB speed vs. cue weight curves will typically be fairly flat near
the optimal, small changes in cue weight won’t have much of an effect, so there’s no need to try to get too
precise with finding your optimal cue weight.

                                    Diagram 1 Optimal break cue weight

Billiards Digest                                                                                     October, 2015
    Now the next time somebody at the pool hall or on an online forum asks about the best weight for a cue, I
hope you feel you now have better answers for them. Or you can just tell them: Use whatever feels best.
FYI, links to all of the online resources mentioned can be found in the “break weight” resource page in the
FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   HSV A.106 – English and squirt for a Predator 314 shaft at slow speed and increasing offsets
high-speed video

                   TP A.30 – The effect of cue tip offset, cue weight, and cue speed on cue ball speed and spin
technical proof

PS: I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the
online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-
author of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice
(VEPP),” “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD
series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       October, 2015
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/outside_vs_inside.pdf
title: Outside Vs Inside
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Outside vs. Inside”                                                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     Do you know the best ways to use outside and inside spin to change cue ball (CB) carom direction off an
object ball (OB) with draw and follow shots? I covered this topic in detail in a recent online video (NV L.70),
and I’ll summarize all the important points below. As shown in Image 1, inside spin refers to hitting the CB on
the inside of the cut direction. With the 1-ball shot, the cut is to the right, so the right spin is called inside spin
in this situation. With the 2-ball shot, the cut is to the left, so the right spin is called outside spin in this situation.
The choice usually depends on the direction you want the CB to head off a rail.

                                                Image 1 Terminology

     Inside spin can be used to narrow carom angle with follow shots. Image 2 shows an example where I need
to pocket the 11 and break out the 10-13 cluster. As demonstrated in the video, the 30º rule peace sign predicts
that a rolling CB will go wide of the target. Some people might think using more speed will impart more topspin
to the CB, allowing it to go more forward, but these people would be wrong. Instead, the extra speed sends
the CB “peeling out” farther down the tangent line before it curves forward, making the CB go wider. You could
attempt to cheat the pocket with a fuller hit to narrow the carom angle some, but it is still not enough to get the
breakout. But adding inside spin gets the job done easily. Inside spin causes slight swerve into the CB,
narrowing the cut angle some, and there are also changes in topspin with the inside. For more information, see

Billiards Digest                                           1                                                      April 2025
the “inside spin” resource page at billiards.colostate.edu. The page also describes other advantages offered
by using inside spin.

                                             Image 2 Inside follow

     Elevated-cue “quick draw” is a good approach for narrowing draw angle. Image 3 shows an example where
I need to pocket the 11 and break out the 1-13 cluster to be able to run out. The 3-times-the-angle system
predicts that a good-action level-cue draw shot will go well wide of the cluster. If you push the miscue limit, you
can get slightly more draw than this, but you will still come up short. You might think that less speed might help
the CB curve sooner, but backspin is lost on the way to the OB, resulting in less draw. Using more speed
instead will impart more backspin and result in less backspin loss, but it delays the curve action. You can cheat
the pocket with a fuller hit to narrow the draw angle, but there is a limit to how much angle change you can get.
In the video, using a very low tip with just the right speed and almost maximum pocket cheat, I was able to
brush the cluster, but cheating the pocket so much and pushing the miscue limit is a little risky. By elevating
the cue instead, you can get quicker draw at a narrower angle. Cue elevation allows you to impart the same
backspin with less forward CB speed resulting in a tighter angle. Although, you need careful to use enough
speed, because driving the CB down into the table like this causes some backspin loss; but with a low-enough
tip and the right speed, you can easily get the break-out without any pocket cheat.

                                              Image 3 Quick draw
Billiards Digest                                      2                                                   April 2025
     Image 4 shows a good shot to test whether outside or inside draw is better than straight draw. I need to
pocket the 11 and draw back for shape on the 8. Sometimes cue elevation is not a good choice due to less
accuracy and reach limitations. But a near-level cue with straight draw does not work here at fast speed, due
to a scratch in the side. However, if you instead use just enough speed to retain enough backspin, but not too
much to scratch in the side, you can get the shot to work. But is it better to add outside or inside spin? I have
heard top players try to justify either as a better approach than straight draw. Outside spin allows for a fuller
hit, which might help narrow the draw angle. And inside spin causes swerve into the CB, creating a more
favorable angle. But plain bottom allows a lower tip, resulting in slightly more backspin. Which approach do
you think is best? Try all three to see for yourself. That’s what I did in online video NV L.70.

     I was careful to cheat the pocket as much as possible to make the hit as full as possible, to narrow the draw
angle. Outside spin allowed me to aim even fuller than no spin or inside spin since the left spin throws the ball
to the right. Outside spin also allowed me to use slower speed. Outside spin is running spin when it hits the
cushion helping to maintain CB motion up table. Slower speed also results in more spin-induced throw which
allows for an even fuller hit. Slower speed also allows the draw to occur sooner.

    With inside spin, you can’t hit the ball as full as with outside spin, but the CB should swerve into the OB
some, straightening the angle a little. Also, some people think that since inside or right spin imparts some left
spin to the OB, this “helping spin” might make it easier for the ball enter the pocket off the far facing. I didn’t
notice this effect during any of my attempts.

    For me, straight draw was best. The lower tip imparts more backspin, and the shot is easier to aim since
there is no CB deflection. The inside spin approach seemed the least effective; but, overall, all three
approaches yielded similar results.

                                            Image 4 Tightest draw

     Image 5 shows a fun challenge shot you can try to compare the three approaches more methodically. The
8 is a diamond in front of the side pocket, and the CB is about a foot away setup for a ½-ball hit, so a center-
to-edge aim pockets the ball cleanly. The cut angle for a ½-ball hit is 30º. The 3-times-the-angle system
predicts that a “good action” draw shot would head perpendicular to the CB’s initial direction, since three times
30 is 90. With the tip even lower, you can beat the good action prediction. And if you hit the 8 fuller, aiming for
the right side of the pocket, you can narrow the draw angle significantly. So the question is: Can you narrow
the draw angle more with outside spin, inside spin, or straight draw, cheating the pocket the same amount with
each?

Billiards Digest                                      3                                                   April 2025
     It is important to use the “Goldilocks” speed on all shots. If the speed is too slow, backspin is lost on the
way to the OB. And if the speed is too fast, the CB slides down the tangent line too long before curving. I tried
each approach in online video NV L.70 until I got 10 good shots each with no miscue. I varied the speed a little
during the trials to try to get the narrowest draw angle possible. Be aware that it’s more difficult to aim accurately
for extreme pocket cheat when using sidespin. The amount of CB deflection and throw vary with shot speed
and distance, the amount of spin, and ball and cloth conditions. In my experience, the straight draw shots were
generally better and more consistent. Apparently, the slight extra backspin is more important than the inside
and outside spin effects. The outside draw shots were generally the least effective at narrowing the draw angle.

                                              Image 5 Draw challenge

    Be sure to watch online video NV L.70 and give everything a try. I am confident that you will find that with
a level cue, it is best to keep things simple and just use straight draw when you are trying to come back at the
narrowest draw angle.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV L.70 –OUTSIDE VS. INSIDE – The Best Way to Narrow the Carom Angle
   normal video

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.
Billiards Digest                                         4                                                   April 2025
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/pattern_play_principles.pdf
title: Pattern Play Principles
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Pattern Play Principles”                                                   ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     Recently, I posted online video NV J.46 covering the Top 10 most important pattern-play principles, which
deal with strategy for choosing ball run-out order and position-play options. These skills really help separate
the great players from everybody else and learning to apply these principles can really help your game. In
this article, I summarize important highlights from the video.

1. Keep It Simple
    The first important pattern play principle is to keep things simple. As demonstrated in the video,
whenever possible, look for stop shots to connect one position to the next. If the cue ball (CB) doesn’t move
much, not much can go wrong. Also look for opportunities to roll the CB from one shot to the next. It is very
easy to visualize the natural angle and judge CB travel distance on follow shots. Try to avoid using sidespin
and going off multiple rails if you don’t need to. And avoid bank shots like the plague unless they are the only
options or very easy (which usually isn’t the case).

2. Leave Correct Angles
     A very important position control and pattern play principle is to leave angles on shots. If you leave a shot
straight, it dramatically reduces your CB control options. All you can do is roll forward, stop in place, or draw
straight back. When you leave an angle, it is important to leave it on the correct side of the ball. Diagram 1
shows a good example. If I used a stop shot on the 7, it would be difficult to get good shape on the 9 or 10
from the 8-ball shot. If trying to get shape on the 9, the best play on the 7 would be to roll forward to leave a
natural angle off the 8 to go two rails for the 9. If trying to get shape on the 10, the best play on the 7 would
be to draw back to leave a stun shot off the 8 with the tangent-line path heading two rails for the 10.

                                     Diagram 1 Leave the correct angle

Billiards Digest                                                                                     February, 2021
3. Plan Three Balls Ahead
    Probably the most important pattern play principle is to always think at least three balls ahead and identify
“key balls” for helping to get shape on important balls like the game ball. Online video NV J.46 has several
good examples of how to do this. Of course, this assumes you are good enough to run at least three balls in
a row. If not, you should probably be reading articles and watching videos dealing more with basics.

4. Come into the Line
     Whenever possible, you should try to come into the line of the next shot to increase your margin for error
with shot speed. Diagram 2 shows a good example. As you can see, the shape zone along the line of the 8-
ball shot if very narrow. When possible, you don’t want to cross the line of the shot through a narrow part of
the shape zone, where the margin for error is very small. Instead, whenever possible, you want to come into
the fat part of the shape zone, along the line of the shot. Here, a natural-angle roll shot (red path) is much
better than a stun shot (blue path). The natural angle heads right into the line of the shot and results in a look
at the 8 over a wide range of shot speeds. The video has many more good examples of the important “come
into the line” principle.

                                  Diagram 2 Come into the line of the shot

5. Use Cushions as Brakes
    It is sometimes helpful to use the cushions as brakes to help slow the CB. Online video NV J.46 provides
many good examples where this is the case. For example, when you need to leave the CB close to a
cushion, don’t attempt to finesse shape by stopping the CB short of the cushion. It is too easy to come up
short. Instead, plan to bounce off the cushion. Because the cushion kills much of the CB speed, this will give
you a much larger margin for error in attaining the CB shape you want. A cushion can be a true friend.

6. Pocket Balls in Groups
   Another important pattern-play principle is choosing groupings of balls wisely. Generally, it is best to
pocket groups of balls that are close together to minimize CB motion. The video shows several good
examples of this principle, along with how to use a “key ball” to transition from one group to another.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     February, 2021
7. Solve Problems Early
    Another smart pattern-play strategy is to solve any problems as soon as possible during the run. You
don’t want to break out clusters or attempt to move a problem ball late in a rack when there won’t be as many
options and insurance balls available. Again, see the video for examples.

8. Master the Table Center
    Often, it is important to be able to get to or go through the center of the table when playing position. In
these situations, it helps to know the 45˚ rule illustrated in Diagram 3. It states that if the CB heads into the
end cushion at close to a 45˚, the CB will head to or through the center of the table. As shown in the video, it
is easy to visualize a 45˚ angle with reference lines through equal diamonds across a corner. The video also
shows several examples of how to take advantage of the 45˚ rule when playing position.

                                              Diagram 3 45˚ rule

9. Play Smart Shape
    Here is some advice related to playing smart shape. First, in general, it is best to play shape for corners
instead of sides, unless the side pocket shape is natural and easy. Usually, it is better to play for long-side
shape when possible. Diagram 4 shows a useful CB control principle for rail cut shots. With the right amount
of outside draw, it is always possible to bring the CB back along the line of the shot. Again online video NV
J.46 shows good examples of this. Another useful piece of position-play advice is to stay off the cushions.
Also make sure you leave CB position that are easily reachable. With smart position play, you should not
need to over-stretch for any shot.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    February, 2021
                              Diagram 4 Bringing the CB back along the shot line

10. Master Position Off Hangers
    Playing reliable position off a pocket hanger, where the object ball (OB) is in the jaws of the pocket, is a
very important skill. I have an entire video dedicated to this topic (online video NV J.28), but I’ll list two useful
principles here:

     1. When rolling the CB toward a corner pocket along a rail, a ½-ball hit sends the CB leaving along a
        diagonal toward the opposite side pocket.

     2. When coming toward a corner pocket along a diagonal, a rolling ½-ball hit sends the CB leaving
        along the rail.

Again, online videos NV J.28 and NV J.46 provide good examples.

     I hope all the advice in this article and online videos helps you be more aware of and effective with
pattern play principles. Just be aware that depending on your ability level, the options I discuss and
demonstrate might not always be the best choices for you. The only way to know for sure is to practice
various options on a real table. If you want to learn more and see countless game-situation examples, see
Volume IV of the Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS). And if you want to learn specific advice and
strategy dealing with 9-ball and 10-ball, see the Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT). And
for specific advice and strategy dealing with 8-ball, see the Video Encyclopedia of Eight-Ball (VEEB). They
are linked along with other useful resources in the YouTube video description of online video NV J.28.

     Good luck with your game from Dr. Dave.

                   NV J.28 – POCKET HANGERS … Everything You Need to Know
normal video
                   NV J.46 – Top 10 PATTERN PLAY Principles and Techniques

Billiards Digest                                                                                       February, 2021
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                February, 2021
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/peace_baby.html
title: Peace Baby - October 2009
topics: cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
Peace Baby - October 2009 - Tom Ross
Free Billiard Library > Tom Ross > Peace Baby - October 2009
Peace Baby - October 2009
For almost two years now I have enjoyed the distinct pleasure of collaborating on various projects with David Alciatore, better known throughout the billiards world as Dr. Dave, a genuine title as he is a professor of mechanical engineering at Colorado State University in addition to his work a Billiards Digest columnist. Initially I joined him to assist with his famous high-speed camera work where we taped dozens of shots and observed the games principles at work in ultra slow motion. Quite often the high-speed camera reveals results that conflict with beliefs widely held among some of the games most experienced players. Other times its simply great entertainment to watch the shots play out in super slow motion. Recently we finished taping the Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots, an extensive video collection of over 700 shots on five DVDs. The first edited video looks excellent, and we hope to make the set available for Christmas.
Because of his background one would expect him to offer comprehensive technical analysis of various billiards phenomena, and thats exactly what he provides. After applying scientific principles to his experiments and observations Dr. Dave gives us precise and reliable explanations for just about anything we see on the pool table. The information he provides is always accurate and often accompanied by complex graphs and charts to support his conclusions. But he is also credited with a simple and reliable technique for predicting cue ball paths across a wide range of cut anglesthe 30-Degree Peace Sign Method.
Stated simply, for cut angles that range from ball to ball hits on the object ball, a naturally rolling cue ball will deflect from the object ball on a path that is roughly 30 degrees to its path toward the object ball. Certain cut angles yield a slightly smaller angle while others yield a slightly larger angle. Across the range of cut angles however the average cue-ball deflection is 30 degrees. And, for the shots where the angle is slightly smaller or greater, the difference is small enough to make a reliable prediction for the cue ball with the 30-degree rule.
To employ the rule while playing we can use a peace sign to predict the cue balls path. For most people, a standard peace sign approximates 30 degrees very closely. If youre not sure about your own peace sign you can check it with a drafting triangle. If thats not available draw a right triangle with a 10-inch base and a 6-inch side at the right angle. The angle between the base and the triangles hypotenuse is 30-degrees, and you can hold your hand over that angle to calibrate your peace sign.
Lets look at two examples where the peace sign rule can be useful. In the first diagram we have a shot on the striped ball that sends the cue ball toward those two nearby solids. If we can roll the cue ball between the solids, shape for the stripe on the right short rail will be easy and natural. So, we can use a peace sign to determine whether the cue ball will find its way between the two obstructions. As shown, the index finger indicates the path the cue ball will take to the striped ball. And, as we see, the middle finger points directly between the two solid balls to indicate that a rolling cue ball will pass between them and continue for position on the next ball. To make an accurate prediction place your hand so the point where the two fingers would meet is directly over the spot where the center of the cue ball will be at contact. In other words, position that point one-half ball width away from the object ball on the aim line. I indicate that point with the red dot in the diagram. On your hand its close to the space between the top knuckles for your index and middle fingers.
In the second diagram the peace sign method works to predict another successful position shot while it also illustrates a very useful reference for many pool shots. In this case the middle finger indicates the line that the cue ball takes to the object ball while the index finger indicates the cue balls path to the short rail. Note that the index finger on this shot makes a line that is exactly perpendicular to the short rail. When playing its very important, for two primary reasons, to recognize shots where a rolling cue ball with no english will leave the first cushion on a line thats perpendicular to that cushion. For shots like the one diagrammed, where the cue ball is going up and down the length of the table, a perpendicular path allows us to predict the position outcome very accurately. In this case it also indicates that we will avoid the obstructing solid balls for position on the next stripe. Further, its important to note that a cue ball with no english moving perpendicular to a cushion cannot scratch, whether its moving up and down or across the table.
After playing enough pool we subconsciously learn cue-ball tracks. All experienced players can make accurate predictions for the cue balls path on most shots. A player cannot hope to compete without that skill. I know that after my three-year, 12-hour-a-day pool education, I had honed that skill despite that I never knew about 30 degrees. I often wonder how much better my game would be if Dr. Dave had come along at the outset of that education to teach me about the peace sign. I would have learned it in one afternoon and gained a fast understanding of cue ball tracks, which would have allowed me to move on to more advanced learning sooner. Plus I was a little hippie as a youngster and would have eaten up an opportunity to walk around a pool table wishing the balls peace.
The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots illustrates the 30-Degree Rule in great detail with a couple dozen examples that show how to recognize and apply it.
Need Help? 24 Hour Response M-F
Monthly Newsletter
Customer Service
Do you have questions about your
order, shipping status or returns or do you need information on
our products or about placing an order with us email us at sales@ozonebilliards.com
Sign Up for
our free monthly email newsletter which includes articles from Tom Ross, Certified Billiard Instructor
and other great information about new products and special offers.
Enter
Email Address
En Espanol
Si tiene preguntas en espanol
mande correo electronico a espanol@ozonebilliards.com
Home
| Info
| Shopping Cart
| Billiard Supplies
| Shipping Info
| Privacy
Policy | Site Index
Check Out Some of Our Most Popular Items
Pool
Balls
| Pool Table Lights
| Cue Racks
| Pool Table
Felt | Pool Cue Cases
| Viking Cues
| | Lucasi
Cues
| McDermott Cues
| Cuetec Cues | Predator Cues
| Scorpion Cues
| Joss Cues
| Meucci Cues
Copyright 2001-Present Ozone Billiards, Inc.
Free Billiard Library > Tom Ross > Peace Baby - October 2009
Peace Baby - October 2009
Free articles, new product info & special offers
About Us
Customer Service
Shopping Cart
Clearance
Billiard Supplies
Pool Cues by Brand
Pool Cues by Price
Pool Cue Cases
Pool Balls
Pool Ball Racks
Cue Racks & Holders
Pool Cue Accessories
Pool Table Accessories
Pool Table Felt
Pool Table Lights
Billiards Books & DVDs
Clothing & Apparel
Specialty Items
Billiard Posters & Signs
Bar Stools
Pub Tables
Dart Supplies
Table Tennis
Customer Service
My Account
Order Status
Wish List
Ozone Rewards
Billiard Supplies Pool Cues by BrandPool Cues by PricePool BallsPool Cue CasesDart SuppliesDart Boards
HomeNew ProductsBest SellersClearanceEngrave On CuesFree Billiard LibraryPool On TVCustomer Feedback
What Our Customers Say
Read more...
Best Sellers
- Yahoo Store Design
.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/peace_sign_subtleties.pdf
title: Peace Sign Subtleties
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Peace Sign Subtleties”                                                        ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu.
The reference numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     I have written a lot about the 30º rule over the years. It states that a rolling cue ball (CB) deflects off an
object ball (OB) at close to a 30º angle over a wide range of shots between a ¼-ball and ¾-ball hit. And since
a firm but relaxed peace sign forms close to 30º for most people, you can use your fingers to easily predict
CB direction for rolling-CB shots. If you point one finger in the initial CB direction, the other finger will point in
the direction the CB will head after hitting the OB. People who play competitively at a high level intuitively
know the natural angle and how it varies with cut angle. They also know the effects of speed on the CB
trajectory. But for the mere mortals among us who don’t have perfect intuition, the peace sign can be a useful
tool. This article looks at subtleties of how to modify the peace-sign technique to be more accurate over a
wide range of shots and situations. Before continuing, if you are not yet familiar with the 30º rule and Dr.
Dave peace-sign technique, refer to the “30º rule” resource page in the FAQ section at
billiards.colostate.edu. I consider the 30º rule the most useful principle of pool.

    Diagram 1 shows how the basic 30º rule peace sign is applied at the table for ½-ball-hit shot. The aim for
a ½-ball hit is sometimes referred to as center-to-edge (CTE) since the center of the CB is aimed exactly
through the outer edge of the OB. As illustrated in the diagram, with the index finger pointing in the initial CB
direction, the middle finger predicts the final CB direction. Actually, the direction will be slightly wider than the
30º prediction since the CB deflection angle is largest close to a ½-ball hit. I adjust for this by stretching my
peace sign a little when a shot is close to a ½-ball hit. A peace-sign template is available on the “30º rule”
resource page to help you calibrate your fingers for accurate visualization of a wide range of shots.

                                   Diagram 1 30º rule peace-sign technqiue

    The enlarged view in the bottom-right portion of Diagram 1 shows where the peace sign should be placed
to get the best prediction for the final CB direction with a slow-speed ½-ball-hit shot. The middle knuckle of
the index finger is placed right over the outer edge of the OB. Notice that this places the vertex of the 30º

Billiards Digest                                                                                            April, 2017
angle slightly back from the center of the ghost-ball (GB) position of the CB. This effectively offsets the
predicted CB direction a little to account for the slight shift in CB path that occurs as the CB curves forward
from the tangent-line direction.

     Diagram 2 shows the effect shot speed has on CB path. It also shows how to modify the peace-sign
technique to account for this. With more speed, it takes longer for the CB to curve forward from the tangent
line. Notice how the final CB path angle is still the same for each shot. The only difference is a parallel shift
in the tangent-line direction. To visualize the shifted path, I slide my peace sign down the tangent line based
on shot speed. At slow speed, I place the index finger right over the outer edge of the OB (see the black
hand). At medium speed, I shift the peace sign about ½ a diamond down the tangent line (see the red hand).
And at fast speed, I shift it about 1 diamond (see the blue hand). The required shift amount obviously
depends on conditions and exact shot speed; but with a little practice, you can develop a feel for this.

                                       Diagram 2 30º rule speed effects

     Diagram 3 shows how to adjust placement of your peace sign for shots of different cut angles. The index
finger points in the initial CB direction; so with a ¼-ball hit (see Diagram 3a), the knuckle of the index finger
will be outside the edge of the OB. And with a ¾-ball-hit (see Diagram 3c), the knuckle will be inside the edge
of the OB. If you want to be accurate in your predicted CB direction, you need to be careful where you place
your finger relative to the OB edge for different cut angles. Also, remember that the CB deflection angle is
greatest (about 34º) for a ½-ball hit, and is less (about 27º) for ¼-ball and ¾-ball hits. 30º is a good average
value to use over a wide range of shots; but if you want to be more accurate, you need to account for the
slight differences. So with shots close to a ½-ball hit, you should stretch your peace sign a little to account for
the slightly larger angle. In Diagram 3b, you can see that the final CB path heads a little wide of where the
standard 30º peace-sign middle finger is pointing. Again, you can easily account for this just by spreading the
fingers a little wider than normal. In Diagrams 3a and 3c, notice that the CB path heads slightly inside of the
middle-finger direction. You can account for this by relaxing your peace sign a little when the hit is a little full
or thin. Again, the peace-sign template available on the “30º rule” resource page can be useful to help you
practice the angles.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          April, 2017
                         Diagram 3 Peace-sign placement for different cut angles

    Diagram 4 shows how to adjust the placement of your peace sign based on the size of your hands. If
you very small hands (see Diagram 4a), you will need to place the middle knuckle of your index finger in front
of the OB edge some. And if you have very large hands (see Diagram 4b), you will need to place your
knuckle beyond the OB edge some. In both cases, the vertex point and predicted final CB direction are the
same. The best way to figure out where to place your hand is with practice.

                         Diagram 4 Peace-sign placement for different hand sizes

    I hope this article helps you more-accurately apply the Dr. Dave peace-sign technique to visualize where
“whitey” will head over a wide range of rolling-CB shots. This is a very important skill in detecting and
avoiding scratches, planning break-out and avoidance shots, working your way through “traffic,” and planning
position for your next shot.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor and author of The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards
book and DVD, the Video Encyclopedias of Pool Shots (VEPS), Pool Practice (VEPP), and Eight

Billiards Digest                                                                                     April, 2017
Ball (VEEB), and the How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS) and Billiard University (BU) instructional DVD
series, all available at: DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                        April, 2017
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/placement_pool_challenge.pdf
title: Placement Pool Challenge
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Placement Pool Challenge”                                                      ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference
numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    If you have watched any Billiard Network matches commentated by Earl Strickland on YouTube recently,
you probably heard him mention “placement pool.” If so, you probably wondered what he meant by the
phrase because he doesn’t really explain it fully. In placement pool, the balls are placed on the table in the
same positions for each player, testing their ability to run out different ball layout patterns. There is no break
shot, which can sometimes involve luck and racking issues, which seems to bother Earl.

    I recently posted a Placement Pool Challenge in online video NV J.85 to test your run-out ability and give
you a chance to win prizes. It is called PPC 100 and it consists of eighteen 9-ball and 8-ball runout layouts.
Detailed rules and ball-layout diagrams are available via the PPC resource page linked in the YouTube video
description. PPC 100 is the fifth of the Billiard University (BU) Playing-Ability Exams.

     Here’s a quick summary of the PPC 100 rules:

     •    consecutively attempt to run each of the 18 layouts in order.

     •    Each runout attempt ends with a miss or foul.

     •    For scoring, you start with 100 points and deduct points for any balls not pocketed legally.

     •    With any 9-ball layout, standard rules apply so slop counts as long as you hit the lowest numbered
          ball first with a legal hit; and pocketing the 9 at any time with a legal shot is a win giving you credit for
          all balls in that layout.

     •    Balls pocketed on a runout-ending foul shot (e.g., a scratch) do not count.

To enter the Challenge, just post your name, score, and video link in the comments section of the YouTube
video. Each of the top 3 players will win a $30 gift certificate that can be applied to any shirt, poster, cap, or
mug purchase at DrDaveBilliardTshirts.com. To encourage participation by all, in addition to prizes for the top
3, there will also be a random lottery drawing from all non-winning participants for the same prize.

    Diagrams 1-4 show four of the most challenging layouts in the PPC 100 Challenge. Study these layouts
and ask yourself what patterns and cue ball (CB) position control options you would use to run them out. The
best approach will depend on the individual and their skill set; but in online video NV J.86, I discuss and
demonstrate what I think are the best ways for a good player to run all layouts in the Challenge. I don’t want
to show you all the “answers” here because I want you to first think about the layouts and ideally try them out
at a table, but I’ll give you a few useful hints from the online video. SPOILER ALERT – here they are:

     •    In Layout 3 (Diagram 1), place the CB to pocket the 5 in the upper side and softly roll the CB into the
          7 ball, ideally hitting the 7 a hair to the right of its center. This guarantees a shot at the 6 and keeps
          the 7 and 8 close for an easy pattern.

     •    In Layout 8 (Diagram 2), place the CB to pocket the 4 in the bottom-right corner and softly roll the CB
          into the 7, thinly cutting it into the rail to attempt to leave the 7 in front of the side pocket. This makes
          it much easier to get from the 6 to the 8 later with many CB control options.

     •    In Layout 11 (Diagram 3), shoot a stop shot on the stripe in the middle of the table, shooting it into
          the bottom-left corner. This leaves a perfect angle on the bottom-middle stripe to leave a perfect
          angle on the top-middle stripe to roll into perfect shape for the right-middle stripe.

Billiards Digest                                                                                              July, 2021
     •    In Layout 18 (Diagram 4), shoot the second stripe from the left into the upper-left corner from the
          short side, rolling forward off the end rail to leave an angle on the left stripe to go off two rails to try to
          leave the middle stripe as straight as possible.

    Again, these hints and many others are demonstrated in NV J.86, so be sure to watch the video after you
think about and try the layouts some yourself.

                                                 Diagram 1 Layout 3

                                                 Diagram 2 Layout 8

Billiards Digest                                                                                               July, 2021
                                          Diagram 3 Layout 11

                                          Diagram 4 Layout 18

    Give the Placement Pool Challenge a try and see how high you can score. Again, the detailed rules, ball-
layout diagrams, and online videos can be found on the PPC resource page linked in the YouTube video
descriptions of NV J.85 and NV J.86. Have fun and good luck with the Challenge!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave
Billiards Digest                                                                                   July, 2021
                    NV J.85 – Placement Pool Challenge (PPC 100)
normal video
                    NV J.86 – SMART RUNOUT POOL – Pattern Play and Position Control

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         July, 2021
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/player_ratings.pdf
title: Player Ratings
topics: technical_proofs, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Player Ratings”                                                         ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Do you ever hear pool players use letters and numbers to describe how well they play, or how poorly
others play? Do you have a FargoRating? If so, do you know what the number means? Do you know how to
rate yourself if you do not already have an accurate rating? I recently posted an online video (NV J.56) that
answers these and other related questions, and I summarize the highlights here.

    Image 1 shows the Player Ratings resource page linked in the video description. There, you can find
detailed explanations for all common rating and handicapping systems and drills. The best and most widely
used is the FargoRate system. FargoRate continually uses an optimized statistical analysis of win/loss data
for all players in the system to come up with accurate player ratings that can also be used to handicap
matches. The good thing about FargoRate is it is based on actual competition performance data, and it
results in ratings that are compatible across the world. The downside is if you have not played in a
CSI/BCAPL/USAPL sponsored league or tournament or in other pro tournaments, you probably do not have a
FargoRating. Also, the numbers and ranges do not mean much to people who do not have much experience
with the system.

                                 Image 1 Player Ratings resource page

     Image 2 shows a Player Ratings Comparison Table from the Billiard University (BU), which is also linked
in the video description, that compares many common rating and handicapping systems. Referring to the 5th
column, if your FargoRating is above 700, you are a top player. And if it is the high 700s or above 800, you
are considered world class. Strong league players are usually in the 550-650 range. Intermediate league
players are usually in the 400-500 range. And beginner level players are usually below 350.

    If you are in an APA, a VNEA, a BCAPL, or other pool league, you have a handicap which can also serve
as a player rating (see the last four columns in Image 2). Assuming people are not sandbagging, these
handicaps can provide an approximate comparison rating among the players in your league; although, the
handicaps do not distinguish very well among top players (see the numbers is the top rows). Also, these
handicaps and their implications can vary a lot among leagues and regions depending on the level of
competition.

Billiards Digest                                                                               December, 2020
                           Image 2 Billiard University Ratings Comparison Table

    Another very common rating system is the ABCD system (see the 3rd column in Image 2), which has
been around for a long time. It is often based on qualitative evaluations of players; although, some leagues
use letter designations to classify players based on their handicaps and performance in tournaments. Here is
a simple interpretation of the classic A-D scale:

     A: a good player capable of running most racks and/or playing lock-up safeties.

     B: a decent player capable of running racks and playing effective safeties periodically.

     C: an average player who doesn’t run racks very often and doesn’t have much of a safety game.

     D: a novice player who makes many mistakes, cannot run even an easy rack, and never even considers
        playing safe.

One problem with the A-D rating system is it is interpreted differently by different people and in different
regions. And to confuse things further, sometimes different labels are used (e.g., “AAAA, AAA, AA, A” instead
of “A++, A+, A, A-“). And some league systems use ego-boosting versions with “Master, AA, A” labels which
are usually very “flattering” compared to traditional ABCD interpretations (see the 4th column in Image 2).
And the Masters level usually includes players over a very wide range of abilities.

     One way to rate yourself if you do not yet have a FargoRating or an accurate ABCD classification is to
take a playing-ability test. One of the most useful and comprehensive system for this is the Billiard University
(BU) Playing-Ability Exams, which consist of a wide collection of well-designed drills to test every skill
important in pool. The first BU Exam (Exam I – Fundamentals) covers important fundamentals including shot
making, CB control, and position play. The second BU Exam (Exam II – Skills) covers run-out skills, safety
play, jacked up shots, kicks, banks, jumps, and the break. The maximum score on each Exam is 100 (just
like in school), and the total BU Score varies from 0 to 200, which correlates with different playing levels as
shown in the first two columns in Image 2. The Exams drills quantify ability level for each individual skill. This
can help you identify strengths and weaknesses in your game. And if you keep track of your scores, you can
quantitatively monitor and set goals for improvement in your game over time. If you want to see Shane
VanBoening and other top players taking the BU Exams, visit the link in the video description.

      One disadvantage of the BU Playing-Ability Exams is some setup is required and it consists mostly of
focused drills that some people do not like. A much simpler alternative to estimate your playing level is to try
a “playing the ghost” rating drill. The phrase “playing the ghost” implies you are playing by yourself against a
fictitious opponent called the “ghost.” You attempt to run a 9-ball, 10-ball, or 15-ball rack with ball in hand
after the break. If you run out, you get a point or a certain score; and if you do not, the “ghost” (who never
misses) wins. Various ways to score and rate yourself are on the page linked in the video description.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    December, 2020
      A new playing ability test I recommend is the Runout Drill System (RDS). As demonstrated in online
video NV J.53, it consists of a set of 16 break-and run challenges of increasing level of difficulty. The number
of balls in each rack varies from 6 to 15 and the rules for each rack get progressive more challenging. Unlike
drill-based systems like the BU Exams, where you repeat the same or similar shots or patterns over and over,
RDS provides endless variation of shots, patterns, and game situations. And no table setup is required …
just rack, break, and run the balls … just like playing regular pool. RDS tests and challenges all player levels
from complete novice to seasoned professional. And you get to pocket lots of balls regardless of your playing
level, so there is no major frustration involved. RDS provides excellent practice and helps one develop and
improve strategy and pattern play in the games of 8-ball, 9-ball, 10-ball, and straight pool. RDS is also
progressive and adaptive. When you do well, the level gets harder; and when you do poorly, the level gets
easier. After an RDS session, your ending level and associated rating should be a decent indicator of your
level of playing ability (see the 6th column in Image 2).

     If you are curious to know how good a player you are, and if you do not already have a FargoRating, try
out the BU Exams, a “playing the ghost” rating drill, or RDS. Not only will you get an impartial and accurate
approximation of your playing level … you will also get in some good practice. And be sure to keep track of
your scores to monitor your improvement over time as your game develops. Good luck, shoot well, and have
fun, from Dr. Dave!

                    NV J.56 – Player Ratings – How Good Do You Play?
normal video
                    NV J.53 – RUNOUT DRILL SYSTEM (RDS) … A New Way to Practice, Teach, and Learn

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    December, 2020
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/please_fix_league_rules.pdf
title: Please Fix League Rules
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Please Fix League Rules”                                                   ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     In a recent online video (NV J.125), I demonstrated several issues with current pool league rules. The
biggest problem is: Every league has a different set of rules. Wouldn’t it be nice if everybody would just use
the same “official rules of pool,” as published by the World Pool-Billiard Association (WPA)? The rules
resource page at billiards.colostate.edu has links to the official WPA rules and the rule sets for popular
league systems. The page also lists the important differences among league rules. In the video, and in this
article, I discuss some of the rule differences and recommend a few changes.

45˚ Rule
     First, let’s cover the “rule” that bugs me the most … the VNEA frozen cue ball (CB) “push shot” rule.
Under VNEA rules, you are required to hit the CB at an angle (to the side or vertically) of at least 45˚;
otherwise, the shot is considered a “push shot” foul. In Image 1, the CB is frozen to the 11 and I plan to
pocket the 13 in the corner. This shot is a foul under VNEA rules unless the cue is elevated 45˚ or more.
Under the WPA “official rules of pool,” you are allowed to hit into a frozen CB since it does not involve a
double hit or a push. The shot might feel different, but it is definitely not a push shot. The VNEA should get
rid of this seemingly arbitrary rule. It makes no sense, it serves no useful purpose, and it has many problems.

                                           Image 1 Frozen CB shot

   First, the shot is legal under the “official rules of pool,” and we should stick to the official rules whenever
possible. As the super-slow-motion clips in my video clearly show, the shot is not a double hit or a push, so it
should not be defined as a push shot. Elevating at 45˚ does not change the action of the shot at all. As I

Billiards Digest                                                                                    September 2022
demonstrate in the video, the action and outcome of the shot is no different whether the cue is level or
elevated at 45˚. Why should a level-cue shot be a foul and an elevated-cue shot be legal if the action and
outcome of both shots is identical?!

    The action of the shot is also no different for various horizontal angles. The CB heads forward of the
tangent line at angles much smaller than 45˚. And the CB still heads forward of the tangent line at angles
much larger than 45˚. The action of the shot is certainly no different for an angle a little less than 45˚ as
compared to an angle a little more than 45˚. So why should one of these shots be a foul and the other not?
The choice of 45˚ for the angle is totally arbitrary.

    Also, if elevating the cue instead of angling it horizontally, 45˚ is a much bigger angle than most players
and refs think, and most people are not at 45˚ when they think they are. In Image 2, look how high the cue
needs to be elevated to make sure the angle is more than 45˚. This is much higher than most players and
refs think is required to satisfy the VNEA 45˚ rule. And what if the player changes the angle of the cue during
the stroke? If the cue was at 45˚ before the stroke, but the angle of the cue is less than 45˚ when the tip hit
the CB, is that a foul? Many people drop their elbow and change the angle of the cue during an elevated-cue
stroke, so this is a concern.

                                     Image 2 Cue elevation above 45˚

    Again, VNEA, please get rid of this apparently arbitrary and problematic “rule.” There will be far fewer
misunderstandings and disagreements, and nothing will need to be judged if we instead follow the “official
rules of pool” and allow a hit into a frozen CB since it is not a double hit or push shot.

CB Fouls Only
     For unrefereed matches common in pool leagues, the WPA recommends calling CB Fouls Only. If a
player touches or moves an OB by accident and the moved ball doesn’t affect the outcome of the shot, the
opponent has the option of leaving the moved ball where it ends up or returning it as close as possible to the
original position. The VNEA does follow the “official rules of pool” on this one.

   Image 3 shows an example where I am pocketing the 11 but touch the 13 with the cue after the hit.
Under most rule sets, including the WPA official rules of pool, this would not be a foul when playing under “CB
Fouls Only” rules. If I unintentionally move 13 with the cue during the shot, my opponent has the option to

Billiards Digest                                                                                 September 2022
leave the 13 where it ends up or return it to its original position. One problem with this is it can be difficult to
know exactly where the ball was originally. My unscrupulous opponent might move it back to “where they
thought it was” in a way that makes the next shot very difficult or impossible. But maybe I deserve it since I
wasn’t very careful and hit a ball I should not. Regardless, it is what it is.

                                       Image 3 CB Fouls Only example

     For jump and massé shots, enforcing CB Fouls Only can be a little tricky. Image 4 shows a routine jump
shot for the win. As demonstrated in the video, the shot is an obvious foul if the CB hits the 11 first instead of
the 8. But what if the 11 moved forward accidentally by the shaft after the 11 is cleared by the CB. Again,
under WPA “CB Fouls Only” rules, this would not be a foul, and you would win the game. This type of shot
can be very difficult to judge, it can cause disagreements and hostility, and it just doesn’t seem right to move
the ball you attempting to jump over. The CSI/BCAPL/USAPL league system has made an improvement to
their rules to address this issue. If you are trying to jump over or massé around an obstacle ball, that obstacle
ball should not move … period. If it does, the shot is a foul. This makes it a lot easy to see and call a foul,
and there is no potential for disagreements or bad feelings. I really like the CSI CB Fouls Only rule
modification. Hopefully, the WPA and non-CSI league systems will also pick up on this good idea.

                                         Image 4 Jump shot example

Billiards Digest                                                                                     September 2022
Open Table
    Under the official rules of pool, the table is open after the break, meaning you can hit any stripe or solid,
but you are not allowed to hit the 8 first. You should not be allowed to hit the game ball first at any time during
the game unless you are on the game ball. Most leagues and tournaments follow this rule. However, under
VNEA rules, you are allowed to hit the 8 first in a combination shot when the table is open. Image 5 shows
an example post-break layout where the 8-7 combo would be a good starting shot in VNEA. This VNEA-
specific rule is a bit ridiculous, and it should be removed. Again, please follow the official rules of pool, like
most people do, including all the other league systems.

                                         Image 5 Open table example

Marking the 8
    Under the official rules of pool, the 8-ball shot is treated the same as any shot. You don’t need to call the
pocket if the shot is obvious. In APA and VNEA leagues, you are required to place a marker close to the
pocket where you intend to pocket the 8. If the marker were somewhere else on the table, maybe from the
previous game, and you forgot to move it to the intended pocket for the 8, you would lose. This is just silly
and can only cause hostility and bad feelings. As with any other shot, if the pocket is obvious, no call or
marker should be required. Losing a game and maybe a match by not marking a short, straight-in shot on the
8 is a terrible thing. Nobody (except a real jerk) wants to win like this, and this rule can only cause
disappointment and bad feelings. Leagues should be fun, not demoralizing. Please get rid of the marking or
patching rule and use the official rules of pool.

Wrap Up
     League rules should be written like this:

                                  We Follow the WPA Official Rules of Pool

Billiards Digest                                                                                    September 2022
If you must have exceptions, you can list them concisely, but you don’t need to re-write all the rules. The
WPA rules and regulations are complete and detailed, and they are written by people who know how to write
rules, and they are well-tested and used worldwide. Also, any referee could then work in any league or
tournament sponsored by any organization without needing to learn specific rule differences. Why can’t
everybody just use the same “official rules of pool” instead of making up silly stuff? If players want a concise
version of the rules to keep in their cue case or to pull up online, short rule summary documents can be found
on the rules resource page at billiards.colostate.edu.

     I personally like the changes the CSI/BCAPL/USAPL system has made, and I hope the WPA and all other
league systems eventually embrace these improvements. Some of the APA and VNEA “special rules” are
just plain ridiculous and should be eliminated. Please try to convince your local league operators to contact
the national organizations to get things changed. If enough people request improvements, maybe the
organizations will listen.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.125 – Please Fix POOL LEAGUE RULES
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    September 2022
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/pool_and_billiards_physics_principles_by_coriolis_and_others.pdf
title: Pool and Billiards Physics Principles by Coriolis and Others
topics: collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
http://billiards.colostate.edu/physics/Alciatore_pool_physics_article.pdf

           “Pool and Billiards Physics Principles by Coriolis and Others”

                             David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE (“Dr. Dave”)
                              Department of Mechanical Engineering
                                    Colorado State University
                                      1374 Campus Delivery
                                     Fort Collins, CO 80523

                                    David.Alciatore@colostate.edu

Abstract
     The purpose of this paper is to provide illustrations and explanations of many important pool
and billiards physics principles. The goal is to provide a single and complete resource to help
physics instructors infuse billiards examples into their lectures. The main contributions of
Coriolis in his 1835 billiards physics book are presented along with other more recent
developments and experimental results. Also provided are numerous links to pool physics
references, instructional resources, and online video demonstrations. Technical derivations and
extensive experimental results are not included in the article, but they are all available and easy to
find online with the references and links provided.

key words: billiards, pool, physics, Coriolis, collision, friction, squirt, swerve, throw

I. INTRODUCTION
     Pool (pocket billiards) is a great physics-teaching tool. It involves many physical principles
including conservation of momentum and energy, friction, elastic and inelastic collisions,
translational and rotational equations of motion, solid mechanics, vibrations, etc. Also, practically
all students have either played or watched pool before, so they can relate to and get excited about
pool examples, especially if the physics understanding might actually help them play better.
Furthermore, because the playing surface of a pool table is ideally flat and the balls are ideally
perfectly round and homogeneous spheres of equal mass, and ball collisions are nearly elastic and
nearly friction-free, equations written for ball trajectories can actually be solved analytically, with
only a few idealized assumptions.
     In 1835, Gaspard-Gustave Coriolis wrote a comprehensive book presenting the physics of
pool and billiards. Coriolis was not only a great mathematician and physicist ... he was also an
avid billiards enthusiast. Coriolis’ billiards physics book has not been very widely read because it
was written in French, and an English translation has become available only recently (in 2005 by
David Nadler [1]). There has also been many technical papers and online material published over
the years expanding on pool physics knowledge [2-5]. In this article, I want to give an overview
of many of the important and useful principles that can be used as examples in physics classes. To
keep this paper of reasonable length, many of the technical derivations are provided online. I also
plan to write more papers in the future that will delve more into some of the technical details and
experimental results related to some of the principles.
     The paper begins with some basic pool terminology, including important effects that come
into play when sidespin is used (i.e., when the cue ball is struck left or right of center). Then I
summarize many of the important principles discovered by Coriolis in the early 1800s. Finally, I

                                                      1
present several topics for which I have done much work over the years: the 90º and 30º rules, cue
ball “squirt” or “deflection,” and friction “throw” effects.
     Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and technical
proofs (TP) referenced throughout the article can be accessed and viewed online at
http://billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV 3.1 and TP
A.6) help you locate the resources on the website; and in the online article, the references are
active links.

II. TERMINOLOGY
     Figure 1 illustrates most of the important terms used to describe pool shots. The cue stick
hits the cue ball (CB) into an object ball (OB). After collision, the CB heads in the tangent line
direction and the OB heads in the impact line (AKA line of centers) direction. The key to aiming
pool shots is to be able to visualize the ghost ball (GB) target. This is the where the CB must be
when it collides with the OB to send the OB in the desired direction, which is along the line
connecting the centers of the GB and OB (see NV 3.1 and NV 3.2 for demonstrations). The cut
angle is the angle between the original CB direction (i.e. the aiming line) and the final OB
direction (i.e., the impact line).

                                    imaginary
                                  ghost ball (GB)          tangent
                                      target                 line

                                                                          aiming
                                                                           line
                       cue           cue
                      stick          ball                          cut
                                    (CB)                          angle
                                            object
                                              ball             line of centers
                                             (OB)                (impact line)

                                   Figure 1 Pool terminology

     Figure 1 is what happens ideally. Unfortunately, in real life, several non-ideal effects come
into play. As shown in Figure 2, when using sidespin (also known as “english”), where the CB is
struck to the left or right of center, the CB squirts away from the aiming line (see NV 4.13 and NV
A.17), swerves on its way to the OB (see NV 4.14 and NV 7.12), and throws the OB off the
impact line direction on its way to the target (see NV 4.15, NV 4.16, and NV A.21). If squirt,
swerve, and throw didn’t exist, pool would be a much easier game to master, but the physics
wouldn’t be as interesting.

                                                2
           z           y                                                            throw
                                             squirt       thrown OB                 angle
                                             angle         direction
               x              initial
                           CB direction
                                                                                  impact
                                                                                    line

                                                                            right
                   bottom-right                            curved       english (spin)
                                          aiming
                     english                               CB path         on CB
                                           line
                                                          (swerve)

                                  Figure 2 Non-ideal sidespin effects

     Squirt and throw will be described in detail in Sections V and VI. Swerve is caused by the
fact that the cue stick is always “elevated” some (i.e., the back end of the cue is higher than the tip
end of the cue) to clear the rails bordering the table. Because of this, when you hit the CB off
center, the ball acquires two spin components (see Figure 3) in addition to any top or bottom spin.
One component is sidespin (about the z axis) caused by the moment created by the cue’s
horizontal component of impact force (Fy) about the vertical (z) axis of the CB. American pool
players refer to this component as “english;” interesting, the British refer to it as “side.” Pure
sidespin has no effect on the path of the CB until it hits a rail cushion (see NV 4.10 and NV 4.11).
The other spin component, about the horizontal aiming-line (y) axis, is called massé spin. It is
caused by the downward component of the cue stick’s impact force (Fz), which creates a moment
about the y axis. HSV A.127 shows a good example of the direction and effect of massé spin.
The component of the friction force between the CB and cloth caused by the massé spin
component is perpendicular to the CB’s direction of motion; hence, the CB’s path will be curved.
With more cue stick elevation, the effect of the massé spin is greater causing the CB’s path to
curve more (e.g., see NV 7.11, NV B.41, and NV B.42).

                                                      3
                                 y

                                     A
               sidespin
                  (wz)           R             x

                                                   ~
                                         ~         F : resultant impulse from the cue
                                         Fy
                                                   R: resting point on the table
                                top view           A: impact line aim point on the table

                                 z       ~                         z
                                         Fz               ~
                                                          F

            masse spin
               (wy)                            x                                  y

                                 R       A                        R      A
                                front view                       side view

                          Figure 3 English and masse spin components

III. CORIOLIS, THE MATHEMATICIAN, PHYSICIST, AND ... BILLIARDS EXPERT
    Below is a concise and illustrated summary of some of the important pool physics discoveries
in Coriolis’ 1835 book [1]. Additional information can be found in my series of articles
describing and illustrating Coriois’ work [6].

                                               4
1.   The curved path followed by a CB after impact with an OB, due to top or bottom spin, is
     always parabolic.

           Figure 4 shows the effect of both bottom spin and topspin. If the CB had no spin, it
     would travel in the tangent-line direction (per the 90° rule in Section IV). When the CB
     deflects off the OB with any spin (e.g., a rolling CB would have topspin), the spin axis
     remains close to its original direction immediately after impact. This is a result of
     conservation of angular momentum, assuming for now friction between the balls is a small
     effect (which is the case, as shown in TP A.6). The spin now creates a friction force between
     the ball and cloth that has a component perpendicular to the direction of travel (see Figure
     3), which causes the CB’s path to curve. Because the magnitude of the sliding friction force is
     nearly constant [7], the magnitude of acceleration will also be nearly constant. It turns out
     that the relative velocity vector defining the direction and magnitude of the sliding motion,
     and therefore the friction force vector, also does not change direction during the sliding (see
     the derivation of Equation 10 in TP A.4). The relative slip speed gradually slows to zero and
     remains zero thereafter (i.e., the cue ball starts rolling without slipping at a certain point and
     continues to roll in a straight line, gradually slowing due to rolling resistance). Because the
     friction force vector, and therefore the cue ball acceleration, are constant in both magnitude
     and direction, the cue ball trajectory will be parabolic, just as with any constant acceleration
     motion (e.g., projectile motion), until the sliding ceases, in which case the CB heads in a
     straight line. TP A.4 contains the full derivation. HSV A.76 contains infrared super-slow
     motion video of example billiard shots clearly showing parabolic traces on the cloth (caused
     by heat generated by friction created by the spinning and sliding ball). Figure 5 shows a still
     image from the video clearing showing a parabolic “hot” trace on the cloth. Also notice the
     “hot spots” caused by the spinning CB hopping several times after being struck with a
     downward stroke. In the video, you can clearly see how the sliding friction force direction
     remains constant as the “hot diameter” develops, intensifies, and persists on the CB.

                                                             tangent
                                              parabolic        line
                                 fast          cue ball
                                 medium         paths
                                 slow

                                                                        fast
                                                                        medium
                                                                        slow

                                                          aiming line
                                          impact
                                            line

                                   Figure 4 Parabolic CB paths

                                                   5
                 Figure 5 Parabolic CB paths (Courtesy of www.bskunion.at)

2.   To safely achieve maximum sidespin, the point of contact of the cue tip with the CB should be
     half a ball radius off center (see Figure 6).

          Obviously, the farther you hit the CB off center, the more sidespin you impart. Although,
     if the tip offset exceeds the half-ball-radius (0.5R) amount, a miscue, where the cue tip slides
     off the CB during impact, is very likely (see NV 2.1 and HSV 2.1). Needless to say, a miscue
     is undesirable in a game situation, because the cue ball does not head in the intended
     direction. Alciatore (in part IV of [6]) performed some high-speed video analysis to
     experimentally determine maximum effective tip offsets possible (without miscue) with typical
     pool equipment. The largest measured effective offset was about 0.55R. As shown in TP 2.1,
     0.55R and 0.5R correspond to required coefficients of friction between the tip and ball of
     about 0.66 and 0.58 respectively. To achieve these values, the leather tip must be properly
     shaped and textured and have chalk applied properly, but all serious pool players do this, so
     the 0.5R limit is appropriate for most equipment.

          In Coriolis’ book [1], there are actually several different analyses involving tip offset. In
     one analysis (a similar analysis can be found in TP A.30), he shows that for a theoretical
     offset greater than 0.6R, the amount of english will be reduced because the cue tip will not
     slow down enough after initial impact and it will stay in contact with the cue ball for a while;
     although, he assumed the cue stick is rigid with no deflection and no cue ball squirt. The
     claimed result is that the cue tip would rub on the spinning cue ball creating friction after
     impact, which would reduce the amount of spin. However, high-speed video analysis

                                                  6
     (described in part IV of [6]) shows that at large offsets, the cue tip deflects away from the cue
     ball and does not remain in contact. Regardless of the various analyses concerning tip offset
     limitations, the miscue limit defined by the maximum possible coefficient of friction appears to
     be controlling factor with typical pool equipment.

                                                contact
                                                 point

                                                          R

                                                      0.5R
                                                                     maximum
                                                                      English

                      Figure 6 Contact point offset for maximum sidespin

3.   With a massé shot, where the CB is struck from above off-center, the final path of the CB will
     be in a direction parallel to the line drawn between the initial base point of the CB and the
     aiming point on the table.

          The technique is illustrated in Figure 7. The final direction of the CB path is parallel to
     line RA, which connects the original CB resting point (point R) to the aiming point on the
     cloth (point A). Using the letters shown in the diagram, with “B” indicating the CB contact
     point, I refer to the Coriolis massé aiming system as the “BAR” method (“B” for ball, “A”
     for aim, and “R” for resting point). This technique can be useful when trying to aim massé
     shots, where you need to curve the CB around an obstacle ball (e.g., see NV 7.11, NV B.41,
     and NV B.42). The detailed physics and math behind the BAR massé aiming method and
     resulting ball paths can be found in TP A.19. The math, physics, and geometry is fairly
     complex; but, conceptually, the result makes sense based on the fact that the initial spin axis
     (which is perpendicular to the RA direction) creates a friction force component that remains
     in the RA direction (per the parabolic trajectory arguments above) until the sliding ceases
     and rolling begins.

                                                  7
                                  aiming
                                   line

             contact point                                                        curved
            on the cue ball            resting point                              cue ball
                  (B)                 of the cue ball                              path
                                       on the table                  fast
                                            (R )                     medium
         aiming point                                                slow
       on the table cloth
              (A)                                                               A R
                                                                                 B
                                                             theoretical
                                                           final direction
                               side view                     of cue ball
                                                         (in RA direction)

                                                                             top view

                            Figure 7 “BAR” massé shot aiming method

4.   For a CB with natural roll, the largest deflection angle the CB can experience after impact
     with an OB is 33.7°, which occurs at a cut angle of 28.1° (see Section IV for illustrations and
     a lot more detail on why this is useful).

IV. 90º AND 30º RULES
     The most important goal in pool is sending the OB into the desired pocket (i.e., “making a
shot”). The second most important goal is knowing where the CB will go so you can easily make
the next shot. Figure 8 illustrates one of the most important principles of pool related to this: the
90° rule (see NV 3.4, NV 3.5, and TP 3.1). It states that when the CB strikes an OB with no
topspin or bottom spin, the two balls will always separate at 90°. In other words, the CB will head
exactly in the tangent line direction and persist along this line. This is true regardless of the cut
angle (see Figure 8). Note – in the remainder of this paper, the CB and OBs will be assumed to all
have equal mass. This assumption is usually very close to reality at a pool table. The CB can
sometimes be heavier (e.g., with some coin operated tables, where a mechanism under the table
can automatically sort the CB from the OBs based on larger size and/or larger weight). The CB is
more typically slightly lighter than the OBs because it experiences more collisions, some abrasion
during tip impact, and abrasion with sliding on the cloth, all of which cause wear and reduced
mass.

                                                 8
                                                       90°
                           (a) small cut

                                                          impact
                                                            line
                                                                         the deflected
                                                        90°             OB and CB paths
                                                                         are 90º apart
                         (b) medium cut
                                                          tangent
                                                            line

                                                        90°

                           (c) large cut

                                        Figure 8 The 90° rule

     The 90° rule is a direct result of the principles of conservation of energy and conservation of
linear momentum (see TP 3.1). All of the CB’s momentum in the impact line direction (see
Figure 8b) gets transferred to the OB, assuming an elastic collision. The result is that the final
paths of the balls are perpendicular. This is what happens ideally. In real life, there is a small
amount of energy loss and retention of impact-line momentum when the CB hits the OB. This
effect is often quantified with a coefficient of restitution (COR). The COR for perfect (ideal) balls
would be 1, representing 100% conservation of energy. Typical pool balls have a COR closer to
0.93. Therefore, the 90° rule is actually closer to the 85° rule (see TP A.5).
     The 90° rule, assuming elastic collisions, applies exactly only for a stun shot, where the CB is
sliding without topspin or bottom spin at impact with the OB. The one exception to the 90° rule is
when the CB hits the OB perfectly squarely, with no cut angle. In this case, the CB stops
completely, transferring all of its speed to the OB. This is called a stop shot (see NV 3.6, HSV
3.1, and HSV 3.2). Notice how in HSV 3.1, to achieve a stop shot, one must often hit the CB
below center to create bottom spin, which gradually slows, so the CB has no spin at impact with
the OB.
     Figure 9 illustrates the physics involved with a stop shot. As the CB slides along the cloth,
the friction force between the ball and cloth creates a torque about the ball’s center that gradually
reduces (decelerates) the bottom spin (see Figure 9b and HSV 3.1). If the CB were to continue to
slide, the friction force would continue to change the CB’s spin, slowly building up forward roll,
as shown in Figure 9a (see also: NV B.10). Note how the CB actually decelerates (as indicated
qualitatively by the relative lengths of the straight arrows in the figure) as the topspin builds,
because the sliding friction force is in the opposite direction as the ball’s motion (see the friction
arrows in the figure). Figure 9c shows what happens if the CB starts out with over-spin, which
implies more topspin than the natural roll amount. The spin rate decelerates (as indicated
qualitatively by the relative shortening of the curved arrows) until rolling develops (see HSV
B.46). In this case, the CB actually accelerates because the sliding friction force is in the same
direction as the ball’s motion (see the figure). When the CB is rolling, there is no longer any
sliding friction, and the CB continues to roll naturally until the ball slows to a stop (due to rolling
resistance) or hits something (e.g., another ball or a rail). If the CB is struck with the cue tip at the

                                                   9
center of percussion (COP), the ball will roll immediately. For a pool ball, the COP is at 70% of
the ball’s height above the table surface, for a level cue (see TP 4.2). To get over-spin (e.g., as in
Figure 9c), the CB must be struck above this height, which is risky due to likelihood for miscue.
Over-spin also occurs when a rolling CB hits an OB (e.g., see HSV B.26).

                                    stun              increasing           normal
                                  (no spin)             topspin             roll
                                                                                              table
                                                                                             surface

                                              friction                     no sliding
                                                                            friction
                                    a) stun-to-roll conversion

                               bottom spin          decreasing              stun
                                                    bottom spin           (no spin)

                                              friction

                              b) bottom-spin-to-topspin conversion

                                                      decreasing           normal
                                 over-spin             topspin              roll

                                              friction                     no sliding
                                                                            friction
                                   c) overspin-to-roll conversion

             Figure 9 Conversion of vertical-plane spin to normal roll (side view)

     As described above, with most pool shots, the CB will be rolling by the time it reaches the
OB. The exception is where bottom spin and/or fast speeds are being used. When the CB is
rolling, the 90° rule no longer applies. What applies instead is governed by what I call the 30º rule
(see Figure 10, NV 3.8, NV 3.9, NV 3.10, NV B.43, and NV B.44). It states that when a rolling
CB hits an OB close to a half-ball hit (see Figure 11), the CB will deflect approximately 30° away
from its initial aiming line. In TP 3.3, I show the detailed physics and math behind the rule, along
with a modern proof for the numbers in Coriolis’ 4th conclusion (see Section III). Wallace and
Schroeder [8] and Onoda [9] also present the supporting technical background for the 30° rule.

                                                 10
                                     fast
                                     medium
                                     slow                              ~30° deflected
                                                                         angle (θ c)

                                                                              aiming
                                                                                line

                           relaxed, but firm, peace sign used
                           to visualize the 30° direction

                                            Figure 10 30° rule

                                                                  half-ball
                                                                    hit

                                       Figure 11 Half-ball hit

     As illustrated in Figure 10 and demonstrated in NV 3.8, you can use your hand to help
visualize the 30° CB direction. As shown in Figure 12, if you form a relaxed but firm V-shape
(peace sign or victory symbol) with your index and middle fingers, the angle between your fingers
will be very close to 30°. NV 3.8, NV 3.9, and NV B.44 show how to use the Dr. Dave peace sign
in practice. If you point one of the fingers in the aiming line direction, the other finger will
indicate the direction the CB will travel after impact.
     Fortunately for pool players, as shown in Figure 13, the 30° rule applies over a wide range of
ball-hit fractions (see TP 3.3). The center of the range is the half-ball hit, but the CB deflection is
very close to 30° for ball-hit fractions as small as 1/4 and as large as 3/4. The exact CB deflection
angle θc as a function of cut angle φ is given by (see Equation 38 in TP A.4):
                                                                  
                                                 sin( φ ) cos(φ ) 
                                   θ c = tan −1                                                   (1)
                                                 sin 2 (φ ) + 2 
                                                                  
                                                              5 
The derivation is fairly involved and complication; but, qualitatively, the shape in Figure 13
makes sense. For a small ball-hit fraction (i.e., large cut angle), the spin axis of the ball after
impact is close to the spin axis of the original rolling CB, and very little translational speed is lost
in the collision, so there is not much sliding between the CB and table after impact, and the CB’s
direction doesn’t change very much (i.e., θ c ≈ 0 ). For a large ball-hit fraction (i.e., small cut
angle), much of the CB’s translational speed is transferred to the OB, and the spin that remains on
the CB after impact, which is almost all of the original roll topspin amount, creates sliding friction
and accelerates the ball forward (as in Figure 9c above). So in this case, the CB’s original
direction also doesn’t change very much (i.e., θ c ≈ 0 ). In the center of the range, both the post-
impact translational motion (along the tangent line) and the acceleration due to friction caused by

                                                   11
the CB’s rotation (as with Figures 4 and 7 above) combine to cause a deflection angle in between
the original aiming line and the tangent line. The maximum CB deflection angle happens to occur
close to a half-ball hit (30º cut angle), as derived in TP A.4. As determined by Coriolis (see also:
TP 3.3), the actual value is approximately a 0.53-ball hit, corresponding to a 34º cut angle.

                Figure 12 Using your hand to visualize the 30° rule CB paths

                         Figure 13 Large margin of error for 30° rule

                                                12
     Figure 14 illustrates the ball-hit-fraction range, and corresponding cut angles, to illustrate the
wide range of shots for which the 30° rule applies. With a 1/4-ball hit (see Figure 14a), the center
of the CB is aimed outside of the object-ball edge such that the projected cue-ball-path passes
through 1/4 of the OB. With a 1/2-ball hit (see Figure 14b), the center of the CB is aimed directly
at the edge of the OB such that the projected cue-ball-path passes through 1/2 of the OB. With a
3/4-ball hit (see Figure 14c), the center of the CB is aimed inside of the object-ball edge such that
the projected cue-ball-path passes through 3/4 of the OB. These three cases cover a fairly large
range of cut angles between 14° and 49° (see TP A.23). Most pool shots are in this range.

                                                      the cue ball path is deflected by
                                                      approximately 30º in each case

                                                    medium                       small
                      large                        cut angle                   cut angle
                    cut angle                                                   (14.5º)
                                                     (30º)
                     (48.6º)
                                      ~30º                        ~30º                          ~30º

      top view:
                            1/4                                  1/2               3/4

front (shooters) view:
   (looking along the
      aiming line)
                                1/4                        1/2                            3/4
                           a) 1/4-ball hit            b) 1/2-ball hit              c) 3/4-ball hit

                                Figure 14 Various ball-hit fractions

     The 30° rule and peace sign technique are extremely useful in practice. This is a great
example where a little knowledge of the physics of the game can be a big help. The rule can be
used to detect possible scratches (where you pocket the CB by mistake), plan carom shots (where
you deflect one ball off another into a pocket), plan ball avoidance or break-up shots, and
strategically plan CB position as you run a rack of balls. Examples of all of these types of shots
can be found on my website (e.g., see NV 3.7, NV 3.10, NV 7.2, NV 7.3, NV 7.4, NV A.1, and
NV B.46).

                                                 13
V. SQUIRT
     Figure 15 shows selected stills from a high-speed-video clip that illustrates the physics
behind squirt. The full clip, which was filmed at 2000 frames/sec, can be viewed online at HSV
A.76a. Still “a” is just before contact. Stills “b” through “e” represent 0.0015 sec during which
the tip is in contact with the ball. This is actually quite typical for most pool shots ... the cue tip is
in contact with the CB only for about 1-2 thousandth of a second, regardless of shot speed. In still
“f” the tip hasn’t fully recovered from the compression yet as the CB is separating. Still “g” is
after separation. The line and arc appearing in each still mark the initial cue stick and CB
positions. Notice how much the cue tip deflects away (down in the diagram) from its original line
of action. Also notice how much the cue tip deforms (e.g., see still “d”). Those leather tips, which
haven’t changed much in 200 years, are quite resilient. The black arrows in still “c” illustrate the
effect that causes squirt. While the tip is in contact with the ball, the ball starts rotating. This
rotation (counterclockwise in the diagram) pushes the cup tip down a little during contact.
Because the end of the shaft has mass, it takes force to move the end of the shaft down as the ball
rotates. An equal and opposite reaction on the CB is what causes the CB to squirt away from the
cue aiming line.

                                                   14
                 Figure 15 Close-up of cue tip impact during an off-center hit

     Shepard [10] and TP A.31 provide the complete derivation relating squirt angle to tip offset
and the “effective endmass” of the cue, which is a function of geometry and material properties of
the end of the shaft. The endmass relates to how far the transverse elastic wave travels down the
shaft (from the tip) during the brief contact time between the tip and ball. In other words, the
“endmass” is a measure of how much effective mass at the end of the cue comes into play due to
transverse (sideways) motion of the tip during contact with the CB. Experiments [11, 12] have
suggested that only the last 15-20 cm (6-8 in) of typical cue shafts contribute to “endmass.” This
is why cue manufactures have been successful with reducing squirt by using a smaller tip and
shaft diameter, using a smaller and lighter ferrule (the white plastic component between the tip and
the shaft), and drilling out the end of the shaft, all to reduce the effective endmass [13]. It would
be interesting to do more experiments to quantify and better model how mass and stiffness
distribution affect endmass, and to measure the elastic wave speed and characterize the
dependence of transverse stiffness, but we or others have not done this yet.
     In the squirt analysis, the tip is assumed to remain in contact with the ball as the ball rotates
(see HSV A.76a for visual evidence of how well a chalked leather tip "grabs" the ball); otherwise,
a miscue results, where the tip slides off the CB and the CB heads in unpredictable directions.
While the tip and ball are in contact, the velocity of the tip and ball are equal at the point of
contact. This assumption, along with linear and angular impulse-momentum principles, is used in
TP A.31 to derive the following result:
                                          5b                  2    
                                                      b          
                                                   1−  
                                             2 R       R         
                              a = tan −1                        2 
                                                                                                   (2)
                                                                 
                                         1 + mb + 5 1 −  b   
                                          me 2   R   
                                                                

where, as illustrated in Figure 16, a is the squirt angle, b is the amount of tip offset from the
center (i.e., the tip contact point eccentricity), R is the ball radius (1 1/8 in = 28.6 mm), mb is the
mass of the CB (usually 6 oz = 170 gm), and me is the effective endmass of the cue (usually in the
5-15 gm range). The squirt angle is very close to a linear function of tip offset, provided miscues
and partial miscues are not occurring. Cross [14] has verified this theoretical result with a series
of experiments. The linear relation makes it easy to compensate for squirt when using sidespin
[15]. Cross [14] also investigated how squirt angle changes with tip offset under conditions of cue
tip slip, but this doesn’t occur with non-miscue pool shots.

                                                          ω
                   me              impulses

                                                                   b

                                                              mb                              α
                                                      R
                                                                                                  v

                                  Figure 16 Squirt terminology

                                                 15
     Figure 17 shows a squirt-testing robot students and I have designed and built to perform
studies with the factors that influence squirt. The machine consists of a spring-loaded carriage on
a linear rail that consistently and accurate delivers the cue at a desired speed and CB tip-contact
point. The cue is held perfectly horizontal throughout the entire stroke (i.e., the cue is not
“elevated”) to eliminate CB swerve as a factor. This is an important feature because swerve can
vary with cue elevation, ball speed, shot distance, and ball and cloth conditions.

                             Figure 17 Cue squirt testing machine

     Figure 18 shows the results of an experiment to show how end-mass affects a cue’s squirt. In
the experiment, a mass was added to the cue at different positions. The masses used in the
experiment weighed 0.3 grams and 1.1 grams. The two curves show the end-mass effect very
clearly. With more mass added to the end of the cue, and the closer the mass is to the tip, the more
the cue ball will squirt. Also, if mass is added beyond a certain distance from the tip, it has no
effect on the amount of squirt. For the cue tested, the distance was about 18 cm (7 in). Notice
how the curves level out to the same squirt value beyond the 18 cm (7 in), regardless of the
amount of the added mass.

                                                16
                                actual data
                               (1.1g mass)

               actual data
              (0.3g mass)

                        added
                        mass

                                                                           squirt
                               distance

                             Figure 18 Squirt vs. position of added mass

     One more thing to note in Figure 18 is how the squirt seemed to dip a little lower for the
larger added mass, before flattening out. When we first saw this, we wondered if adding even
more mass at this point would reduce the squirt even further. If that were the case, we might have
discovered a new way to make a low-squirt cue. Unfortunately, adding more mass at that point
did not cause additional decreases in squirt.

VI. THROW
     Figure 19 illustrates all of the important terminology and physics concerning throw. Throw
occurs any time there is relative sliding motion between the CB and OB surfaces at impact. In the
figure, the relative motion is a result of CB sidespin; so the resulting throw would be called spin-
induced throw (SIT). Throw can also be caused by cut angle alone, in which case it is called cut-
induced throw (CIT). In Figure 19, the right (counterclockwise) sidespin creates a sliding friction
force that pushes the OB to the left. This force is what creates the throw angle. The spin imparted
to the OB is called transferred spin. In this case, the throwing force to the left creates clockwise
(right) transferred spin on the OB. Spin transfer is an important effect with bank shots (e.g., see
NV A.21).

                                                 17
                                                 throw
                                                 angle
                                                 (θthrow )
                                                                impact
                                                                  line
                                                     OB
                                                    motion

                                                                              OB
                                                                             center
                                 transferred
                                     spin
                                                                 OB
                                                                          throwing
                                                                            force
                                                       main
                                                      impact
                                                       force

                                                                    CB
                                                                   motion

                                                                                 CB
                                                                              sidespin
                                                                  CB             (w)

                      Figure 19 Throw and spin transfer terminology and physics

     Throw angle θthrow depends on the speed of the shot v, the cut angle φ, the amount and
direction of CB spin w, and the friction properties of the balls. The complete derivation can be
found in TP A.14, and here is the main result:
                                − cm (v sin(φ ) − Rω z )2 + ( Rω x cos(φ ) )2                                                 
                      am + bm e                                               v cos(φ )                                       
                 
θ throω = tan −1 min                                                                    , 1 7 (v sin(φ ) − Rω z )    v cos(φ )
                    
                             (v sin(φ ) − Rω z )2 + (Rω x cos(φ ) )2                              
                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                   (3)
where am, bm, and cm are parameters used to characterize how dynamic sliding friction varies with
the relative surface speed between the CB and OB at impact.
     The 1/7 term in the “min” function in Equation 3 results from a requirement that relative
sliding motion between the CB and OB cannot reverse direction during impact. In the limiting
case, the relative velocity between the ball surfaces goes to zero during impact (i.e., sliding ceases
during impact). The total possible friction impulse during impact is limited by this 1/7 factor (see
TP A.14). Previous treatments of pool-ball throw in the literature (e.g., Chapter 4 in [4]), have not
included the no-slip-reverse constraint in the friction model.
     The exponential model for friction used in Equation 3 is based on experimental data from
Marlow (p. 245 in [3]) and Alciatore (TP B.3). The coefficient of dynamic friction between pool
balls is far from constant ... it is much lower at higher relative speeds between the ball surfaces.

                                                             18
The exponential model of friction in Equation 3 fits experimental data quite well (see TP A.14 and
TP B.3). Possible reasons for why the friction coefficient decreases with higher relative surface
speed include: surface asperities might glance over each other (and not intermesh as easily) with a
moving surface, and boundary layer effects due to entrapped and displaced air might have a larger
effect at higher speeds.
     Figure 20 shows an example plot generated from Equation 3. This particular plot shows how
the amount of throw changes with cut angle for a stun shot (i.e., sliding CB in translation only) at
various speeds (slow, medium, and fast). Useful conclusions one can observe from the figure
include:
     • For small cut angle shots (i.e., fuller hits), the amount of throw does not vary with shot
          speed, but increases with cut angle. The reason for this is the 1/7 factor described above.
          At small cut angles, sliding between the balls ceases during impact, and the coefficient of
          sliding friction has no effect on the total tangential impulse experienced during the
          collision.
     • For larger cut angle shots (i.e., thinner hits), the amount of throw is significantly larger
          for slower speed shots as compared to faster speed shots. This is due to the lower
          coefficient of sliding friction resulting from the faster relative speed between the sliding
          ball surfaces during impact. If friction did not vary with speed (e.g., if a constant were
          used for m in Equation 3), there would only be a single curve in Figure 20, and the right
          portion would be a horizontal, straight line.
     • The amount of throw decreases a little at large cut angles, but not by much (especially for
          slower speed shots). Again, this is due to the sliding friction speed dependence. At
          larger cut angles, the relative speed of sliding is larger for a given ball speed.
     • The maximum throw occurs at close to a half-ball hit (30º cut angle).
Experiments performed by Jewett [16] and Alciatore [17, 18] have verified many of these and
other trends predicted by Equation 3. Jewett’s data is shown in Figure 21. The exact throw
values in Figure 20 cannot be directly compared to those in Figure 21 because the exact physical
properties of the balls, and the precise speeds used for “slow,” “medium,” and “fast,” are not
available. However, the point of the figures is to show that the experimental data do exhibit the
same trends predicted by the model. Other experiments (e.g., for follow and draw shots [18]) also
verify trends predicted by the model.

                                                 19
                              theoretical CIT

        7

        6

        5

        4                                                            slow
throw

                                                                     medium
        3                                                            fast

        2

        1

        0
            0   10     20        30        40       50        60
                              cut angle

                                                                              Figure
                       20 Stun shot collision-induced throw

 Figure 21 Experimental stun-shot cut-induced-throw data (Courtesy of Bob Jewett)

                                          20
     Numerous graphs and contour plots showing how throw varies for all types of shots can be
found in TP A.28 and TP B.3. Depending on the speed, angle, and type and amount of spin on
the ball, the throw amount can vary significantly. Obviously, to play pool at a high level, one’s
aim must be compensated to account for throw variations with different types of shots.

VII. CONCLUSIONS
     This article has presented a collection of pool and billiards principles that make for excellent
class examples of many fundamental physics topics including friction, energy, momentum,
inelastic and elastic collisions, kinematics, and equations of motion. I have used pool examples in
many engineering and physics classes over the years, and students seem to enjoy and relate to
them. Due to size constraints, I have not included derivations or much experimental data in the
article. Instead, I have referenced online resources where the details can be found. I wanted this
article to be comprehensive summary document with good illustrations and complete lists of
online and print references for educators who want to use pool and billiards examples in their
courses. In future articles, I plan to present more details concerning derivations and experimental
results for some of the more interesting and complex topics (e.g., throw and squirt). As a final
note, if you plan to assign any pool or billiards analysis questions for homework in any of your
physics classes, there is a useful summary of typical values for all important physical parameters
in [19].

Bibliography
[1]      Nadler, D., Mathematical Theory of Spin, Friction, and Collision in the Game of
         Billiards, an English translation of Coriolis' 1835 book,
         http:/www.coriolisbilliards.com, 2005.
[2]      Alciatore, D., Pool and Billiards Physics Resources, lists of and links to many pool
         physics articles, books, and websites, http:/billiards.colostate.edu/physics.
[3]      Marlow, W., The Physics of Pocket Billiards, Marlow Advanced Systems Technologies
         (MAST), 1995.
[4]      Shepard, R., "Amateur Physics for the Amateur Pool Player," 3rd edition,
         http://billiards.colostate.edu/physics/Shepard_apapp.pdf, 1997.
[5]      Alciatore, D., The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards, Sterling Publishing, New
         York, 2004.
[6]      Alciatore, D., "Coriolis was brilliant ... but he didn't have a high-speed camera - Parts I-
         IV," Dr. Dave's Illustrated Principles, Billiards Digest, July-December,
         http://billiards.colostate.edu/bd_articles, 2005.
[7]      Witters, J. and Duymelinck, D., "Rolling and sliding resistive forces on balls moving on a
         flat surface," American Journal of Physics, Vol. 54, No. 1, pp. 80-83, January, 1986.
[8]      Wallace, R. and Schroeder, M., "Analysis of Billiard Ball Collisions in Two
         Dimensions," American Journal of Physics, Vol. 56, No. 9, September, pp. 815-819,
         1988.
[9]      Onoda, G., "Comment on 'Analysis of Billiard Ball Collisions in Two Dimensions',"
         American Journal of Physics, Vol. 57, No. 5, pp. 476-478, May, 1989.
[10]     Shepard, R., "Everything you Always Wanted to Know About Cue Ball Squirt, but Were
         Afraid to Ask," http://billiards.colostate.edu/physics/Shepard_squirt.pdf, 2001.
[11]     Alciatore, D., "Squirt - Part VII: cue test machine results," Dr. Dave's Illustrated
         Principles, Billiards Digest, Vol. 30, No. 3, pp. 38-39, February, 2008.
[12]     Alciatore, D., "Return of the squirt robot," Dr. Dave's Illustrated Principles, Billiards
         Digest, Vol. 30, No. 9, pp. 36-37, August, 2008.

                                                21
[13]   Alciatore, D., "Squirt - Part V: low-squirt cues,", Dr. Dave's Illustrated Principles
       Billiards Digest, Vol. 30, No. 1, pp. pp. 38-39, December, 2007.
[14]   Cross, R., "Cue and ball deflection (or “squirt”) in billiards," American Journal of
       Physics, Vol. 76, No. 3, pp. 205-212, 2008.
[15]   Alciatore, D., "Squirt - Part IV: BHE, FHE, and pivot-length calibration," Dr. Dave's
       Illustrated Principles, Billiards Digest, Vol. 29, No. 12, pp. 40-41, November, 2007.
[16]   Jewett, B., “Seeking truth of beliefs,” Tech Talk, Billiards Digest, pp. 30-32, June,
       1995.
[17]   Alciatore, D., "Throw - Part II: results," Dr. Dave's Illustrated Principles, Billiards
       Digest, Vol. 29, No. 10, September, 2006.
[18]   Alciatore, D., "Throw - Part III: follow and draw effects," Dr. Dave's Illustrated
       Principles, Billiards Digest, Vol. 29, No. 11, October, 2006.
[19]   Alciatore, D., “Approximate values for all pool/billiards-related physical properties,”
       http://billiards.colostate.edu/threads/physics.html#properties, 2007.

Note:
All of the Billiards Digest         articles   referenced    above    are   also   available     at:
http://billiards.colostate.edu

                                               22
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/pool_by_numbers.pdf
title: Pool By Numbers
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Pool by Numbers”                                                             ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu.
The reference numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

   Pool is fascinating, especially to an engineer-type like me who sees beauty in the math and physics of the
game. There are many interesting facts, principles, and “rules of thumb” of pool that can be expressed as
simple numbers. In this article, I summarize in numerical order some of the most interesting “pool by
numbers” wonders.

0.0003 sec
     Three ten-thousandth of a second (which is a tiny amount of time) is the typical duration over which pool
balls stay in contact when they collide, for a wide range of shot speeds. For more information, and
demonstrations, see the “contact time” resource page under “balls” in the FAQ section at
billiards.colostate.edu. Pool balls do not compress very much and do not stay in contact very long, even
with fast-speed shots.

0.001 sec
    One thousandth of a second is the average length of time a cue tip stays in contact with the cue ball (CB)
during a hit. A slow-speed shot with a soft tip has a longer contact time (about 0.002 sec), but this is still
extremely small. A very hard tip (for example, phenolic) at fast speed has a shorter contact time (about
0.0005 sec). People who think they can apply action to the CB while the tip is in contact with the CB are flat
wrong. The action of the shot depends only on the cue speed, tip contact point, cue direction, and cue
elevation angle at impact. There is nothing you can do while the tip is in contact with the CB that can change
the outcome of the shot. Only what you do before contact makes any real difference. For more information,
and further explanations, see “contact time” under “cue tip” in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.

3x
     For a fairly full hit, with a ball-hit-fraction greater than 3/4, the CB will deflect about three-times the cut
angle. This principle is illustrated in Diagram 1. The cut angle of the shot is “A,” and the resulting angle
between the initial and final CB directions is “3A.” For more information, see the “where the CB goes for
different types of shots” resource page under “cue ball control” in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       January, 2017
                               Diagram 1 Full-hit rolling CB deflection angle

     For a good action draw shot with a cut angle smaller than about 40º (in other words, a ball-hit fraction
greater than about 3/8), the total angle between the original and final CB directions will be three-times the cut
angle of the shot. This principle is called the “trisect system” and is illustrated in Diagram 2. For more
information and demonstrations, see NV B.67 and the “trisect aiming system” resource page under “draw” in
the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.

                                          Diagram 2 Trisect system
Billiards Digest                                                                                     January, 2017
7-8x
    If a rolling CB hits an object ball (OB) squarely, the OB will travel about 7 to 8 times farther than the CB
after impact (assuming the OB doesn’t hit a cushion). This rule is useful when trying to visualize how far the
CB might roll forward based on the speed you intend to hit the OB (for example, a pocket-speed shot, where it
is easy to visualize the OB travel distance). For more information, see “ball speeds and travel distances”
under “speed control” in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.

25-30 mph
     25-30 miles per hour (11-13 meters per second) is the typical speed range for very good power break.
The best power breakers in the world can approach 35 mph, but this is very unusual (and difficult to control).
For more information, see “typical speeds for a range of shots” under “speed control” in the FAQ section at
billiards.colostate.edu.

30º
     The 30º rule states that for a rolling-CB shot, over a wide range of cut angles between a 1/4-ball and 3/4-
ball hit, the CB will deflect by very close to 30° from its original direction after hitting the OB. I consider the
30º rule the most useful and important principle of pool, and it is the topic for which I have written the most
articles over my many years as a Billiards Digest columnist. Diagram 3 shows how the CB deflection angle is
very close to the natural angle (about 30º) over a wide range of shots. For more information and
demonstrations, see NV B.66 and the “30-degree rule” resource page in the FAQ section at
billiards.colostate.edu.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      January, 2017
                                                Diagram 3 30º rule

45º
     The 45º rule states that if the CB rolls into the short rail (fairly close to the center of the rail) at close to a
45º angle, it will head off two rails toward the center of the table. This principle, illustrated by the shot in
Diagram 4, is very useful when trying to get center-table shape and when needing to go around the table for
position (especially in rotation games like 9-ball and 10-ball). As shown by the gray lines parallel to the CB
tangent line in the diagram, it is easy to visualize the 45º direction by connecting diamonds equal distances
from the pocket. For more information and demonstrations, see NV B.74 and the “45-degree rule for center-
table position and routes” resource page under “cue ball control” in the FAQ section at
billiards.colostate.edu.

Billiards Digest                                                                                           January, 2017
                                             Diagram 4 45º rule

90º
    The 90º rule states that for a stun shot, where the CB has no top or bottom spin at impact with the OB,
the CB and OB separate at 90º, regardless of the cut angle (except for a straight-in shot, in which case the
CB stops in place). In other words, with a stun shot, the CB heads and persists along the tangent line
direction, which is perpendicular to the line of centers (the line between the center of the ghost ball position
and the OB). For more information and demonstrations, see the “90 degree rule” resource page in the FAQ
section at billiards.colostate.edu.

1700 lb (7600 N)
    The peak force between the cue tip and CB during a fast-speed power break can reach and exceed 1700
pounds (7600 Newtons). For those with a math/physics education and an interest to learn more, the
derivation can be found in TP B.20.

10,000 hr
    An anecdotal “rule” usually attributed to writer Malcolm Gladwell states that 10,000 hours of “deliberate
practice” are required to become “world class” in any field. Obviously, there are exceptions to this “rule.” For
example, in pool, some people can achieve excellence with well less than 10,000 hours of practice (due to
tremendous “natural ability”), and some (with poorer vision, less physical coordination and control, less
competitive drive, and less ability to stay focused) can never become “world class” regardless of how much
they practice. For more information, see the “what it takes to play like a pro” resource page under “advice” in
the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.

     I hope you enjoyed my numerical summary of some of pool’s amazing wonders. This was Dr. Dave’s
article number 1 in the year 2017.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    January, 2017
Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV B.66 – The 30-degree rule, from VEPS I
                    NV B.67 – The trisect system for draw shots, from VEPS I
normal video        NV B.74 – Center-of-table position and routes, with the 45-degree rule, from VEPS II

                    TP B.20 – Peak forces during a break shot
technical proof

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and
co-author of the Video Encyclopedias of “Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Pool Practice (VEPP),” and
“Eight Ball (VEEB),” and the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS)” and “Billiard University (BU)”
instructional DVD series, all available at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                           January, 2017
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/pool_friendly_eyeglasses.pdf
title: Pool Friendly Eyeglasses
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Pool Friendly Eyeglasses”                                                ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     Do you wear glasses when playing pool, like me? If so, do you have your head in an uncomfortable
position to get the view you want through your glasses? Do you need to move your head to focus on both the
cue ball (CB) and object ball (OB)? Do you sometimes look over the top of the lenses? Do you raise your
eyebrows and wrinkle your forehead to force your glasses higher? Do you look through the top parts of the
lenses where the focus might not be perfect? Or do you find the top rims and blurred vision above the lenses
distracting, especially when focusing on the OB? If any of things apply to you, you’re in the right place. In a
recent online video (NV J.83), I demonstrated how to use eyeglasses more effectively when playing pool. In
this article, I’ll summarize the important advice from the video.

     First, there are options you might consider if eyeglasses give you trouble. You can purchase specially
designed billiard or snooker glasses with tall lenses and no top rim (see Image 1). They look a little goofy,
but they are very effective because it is almost impossible to look over the top of the lenses. I, for one, am
not willing to make such a fashion statement. And I also don’t want to purchase, carry, and care for an extra
pair of glasses if I don’t need to.

                                          Image 1 Billiard Glasses

    Other options include getting LASIK surgery to correct your vision, wearing contact lenses, or having your
existing eyeglasses adjusted to make them more effective at the pool table. LASIK surgery is a popular
choice, but it is expensive and comes with slight risks. Also, as your eyes change with age, your vision will
need to be corrected again in the future. Contact lenses are also commonly used for pool. I never liked the
inconvenience and discomfort of contacts, especially being in Colorado where the air is very dry. And
because I have astigmatism, the contacts prescription can’t be quite as good as my eyeglasses prescription.
And to me, when playing pool, I want my vision to be as good as possible.

    Adjusting the nose pads and temples of existing or new glasses can dramatically improve their
effectiveness for playing pool. The goal of the adjustments is to have the glasses sit closer to your face with
the upper rims beneath or touching your eyebrows so it is impossible to look over the tops of the lenses (see
Image 2). My nose pads have been bent down and forward to allow the glasses to sit higher on my nose and

Billiards Digest                                                                                 December, 2021
closer to my face (see Image 3). And the temples have been bent so they fit snuggly behind the ears to hold
the glasses in place. You can do the adjustments yourself, but it is much easier to have the technician at your
optometrist office help.

                                          Image 2 Adjusted Glasses

                                       Image 3 Nose pads and temples

     As demonstrated in online video NV J.83, when I put my glasses on for pool, I lift them up, pull them
toward my face and tuck the temples snuggly behind my ears. It also helps to have a low stance. With a high
stance, with the head well above the cue, it is difficult to focus on both the CB and OB without moving your
head, especially if the glasses aren’t adjusted properly. But with a low stance, it is easy to move the eye gaze
between the CB and OB with no head motion and with good focus on both (see Image 3). If you want help
finding a comfortable low-stance position, see the videos and info on the stance advice resource page linked
in the video description.

Billiards Digest                                                                                  December, 2021
                                                 Image 3 Low Stance

     When ordering new glasses for pool, single-vision lenses will usually be the best choice. Some people
can benefit from bifocals or progressive to help them focus clearly on both the CB and OB, but most people
just need distance correction to play pool. You can have your optometrist fine tune your prescription to focus
on the typical distance range of pool shots (3-9 feet). Some people might prefer a monovision prescription,
where one eye is focused for close-up viewing (e.g., the CB) and the other is focused for longer distance
(e.g., the OB target), but this choice is not right for everybody, and it can cause vision center alignment issues
since the monovision “vision center” head position can change with shot distance.

   I hope the advice in this video helps you make better use of your eyeglasses when playing pool. If you
want to learn more, see the information and links on the pool eyeglasses resource page linked in the video
description.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.83 – Making Eyeglasses Pool Friendly
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    December, 2021
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/pool_myths_part_1_the_list.pdf
title: Pool Myths Part 1 The List
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Pool Myths – Part 1: The List”                                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu.
The reference numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    The pool world has been rife with myths and misconceptions throughout its sordid history. Fortunately,
with the wealth of excellent instructional books and videos and online resource now available, much of the
misinformation has been solidly debunked. However, some preconceptions and wrong assumptions are hard
to break in some people … especially pool “Old Timers” and the individuals they influence with their constant
spewing of pool mythology.

    This month, I am beginning a Pool Myth Buster series by listing my Top 100 List of Pool and Billiards
Myths. And over the next few months, I’ll pick some of the most entrenched pool myths and do my best to
debunk, bust, and explain them in detail. For now, here’s my categorized list, starting with the top 50 in the
categories of equipment, fundamentals, stroke, aiming, cue ball control, follow and draw, and english
(sidespin). Next month, I’ll list the second 50 in the categories of english (sidespin), squirt (cue ball
deflection), bank and kick shots, throw and spin transfer, break shot, jump and masse shots, fouls, pool
physics, and general advice.

    The list contains links to supporting resource pages referenced by the parenthetical “see ….” items in the
explanations below. All of the resources are available in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.

                           Dr. Dave’s Top 100 Pool and Billiards Myths ...
                                 Debunked, Busted and Explained

Equipment
     1.     The brand of chalk you use makes a big difference in play.

                   This is really not the case, assuming you chalk properly before each off-center hit (see chalk
                   brand comparison).

     2.     Pre-flag Master chalk is better than flag Master chalk.

                   Careful tests show that this is not the case (see chalk brand comparison and pre-flag vs. flag
                   Master chalk).

     3.     Softer tips allow you to put more spin on the ball.

                   This is true only if the softer tip holds chalk better than the tip to which it is being compared (see
                   cue tip hardness effects).

     4.     Low-cue-ball-deflection (LD) shafts allow you to put more spin on the ball.

                   This is not the case (see getting more spin with an LD shaft).

     5.     A smaller-diameter shaft/tip allow you to put more spin on the ball.

                   It might seem like this to a player, but there are logical reasons to explain this false belief (see
                   cue tip size and shape effects).

     6.     LD shafts are better than non-LD shafts.

                   This is not true in general for all people (see advantages and disadvantages of LD shafts).
Billiards Digest                                                                                               June, 2017
     7.     When you switch from a regular non-LD shaft to an LD shaft, you won't need to change the
            way you play.

                   This might be true in general; but when applying sidespin, you will need to aim differently to
                   account for the difference in CB deflection (squirt).

     8.     Cue "feel" and "feedback" affect how it plays.

                   The sound and vibration created by a hit definitely affect how a cue "feels," but the "feel" has no
                   direct effect on how the cue "plays" (see cue "feel," "hit," "feedback," and "playability").

     9.     When you miscue, it is the tip's fault.

                   A miscue is usually caused by poor stroke technique (e.g., grip tightening and/or elbow drop
                   before CB contact).

     10. It's the arrow, not the Indian.

                   A good player can play well with any cue (assuming it is mechanically sound and has a decent
                   tip). Furthermore, a great cue will not truly help a bad player play better (although, there could be
                   psychological effects resulting in slight improvements if a player thinks they should play better
                   with a better cue). Now, an LD shaft does offer advantages to some people (although, they also
                   have disadvantages for some people). One advantage is that less aim compensation for squirt is
                   required with an LD shaft. However, a "bad player" typically doesn't use english much, not
                   intentionally anyway. And when they use english unintentionally (e.g., with a swooping stroke), or
                   if they are using back-hand english (either with a pre-stroke pivot or with a swooping stroke), an
                   LD shaft is better only if they use a long bridge length. If a player prefers a short bridge length,
                   the advantages an LD shaft offers is limited. Now, if the "bad player" attempts to use "parallel
                   english" and doesn't compensate aim for squirt, then the LD shaft will offer an advantage;
                   although, he or she will still miss many (if not most) shots in this situation.

Fundamentals
     11. There is a "proper" or "conventional" stance that is most effective for most people.

                   The ideal stance for each individual (feet positions and directions, knee bend, body bend and
                   direction, head height and position, arm position relative to the body, etc.) can be very different
                   from one person to the next based on stability, comfort, anatomy, and stroke clearance
                   requirements (see stance technique advice).

     12. A closed bridge is better than an open bridge.

                   This might be true for some people and some shots, especially if one has stroke flaws, but it is
                   not true in general (see open bridge vs. close bridge).

     13. It's always best to look at the OB last before the final stroke.

                   Most people are most accurate and consistent if they focus on the OB target (and not the CB)
                   during the final forward stroke (see eye pattern advice). One exception is elevated-cue shots or
                   other situations where tip position on the CB is critical (see the stroke "best practices" document).

     14. When checking your aim, it is best to move your eyes quickly between the CB and OB.

                   On the contrary, your eyes should be still and quiet when checking aim and alignment (see quiet
                   eyes and reasons for pauses).

     15. Determining which eye might be "dominant" or not is important.

                   This is not true (see dominant eye). What is important is finding and consistently aligning your
                   personal "vision center" over the line of the shot (see vision center).

Billiards Digest                                                                                              June, 2017
     16. A tighter grip is better on power shots.

                   A tight grip will actually usually decrease power. The grip should generally be relaxed during the
                   entire stroke, regardless of the power of the shot (see grip technique advice).

     17. Many misses are caused by "jumping up" on the shot.

                   Raising the body during the stroke into the ball is most definitely a no-no. However, most good
                   players stay down during the stroke fairly well. Regardless, they often jump up as soon as they
                   realize they hit a shot badly, and most good players know if a shot is good or not immediately
                   after the hit. Therefore, when a commentator drops the cliché line: "He missed because he
                   jumped up on the shot," the commentator is usually wrong. Usually, a more accurate description
                   is: "He jumped up because he missed the shot."

     18. Most misses are caused by a bad stroke.

                   For intermediate to advanced players, most misses are probably due to aim and alignment errors
                   rather than stroking errors. "Alignment" involves both placing the cue in the desired direction and
                   placing the tip at the desired position on the CB. Also, when using intentional sidespin, many
                   misses are due to an incomplete understanding of how to accurately compensate for squirt,
                   swerve, and throw. (see aim compensation for squirt, swerve, and throw).

Stroke

     19. Adding a pause at the back of your stroke is bad.

                   What is worse is jerking the transition between the back and forward strokes (see stroke
                   technique advice and reasons for pausing).

     20. The cue should move along a straight line during the entire stroke with a piston-like motion.

                   Actually, a pendulum stroke, where the elbow does not drop and the follow through is not
                   exaggerated, can be more effective for most people and most shots (see pendulum vs. piston
                   stroke and elbow drop).

     21. The "type" and "quality" of stroke makes a difference in the outcome of a shot.

                   The only things the CB "cares" about is the hit, not the stroke technique leading to the hit (see
                   "type" or "quality" of stroke).

     22. "Accelerate through the ball" is bad advice because it is not possible physically.

                   It is true that the cue cannot be accelerated during a hit (because it actually slows down
                   significantly during a hit, per the stroke acceleration resource page), but thinking this ("accelerate
                   through the ball") can be useful advice to encourage people to not be hesitant, to finish the
                   stroke, and to create more speed into the ball (e.g., with draw shots).

     23. The cue is and should be "level" on most pool shots.

                   With most pool shots, where the cue must clear the rails, it is impossible for the cue to be truly
                   level ... the butt must be elevated at least a small amount. Regardless, in general, it is best to
                   keep the cue as level as possible to minimize CB swerve (see cue elevation effects).

     24. Follow through puts more spin on the CB.

                   This is not true. The follow through is often a good indicator of a good stroke, but it has no direct
                   effect on the outcome of the shot (see follow through).

Billiards Digest                                                                                               June, 2017
     25. Dropping the elbow after CB contact makes a difference.

                   Dropping the elbow after the hit might feel right and be more comfortable for some people, but it
                   doesn't really offer any direct advantages. (see elbow drop).

Aiming
     26. "Aiming systems" are not helpful.

                   For some people, an "aiming system" can be very helpful (see benefits of aiming systems).

     27. Pros have a secret "aiming system."

                   This is simply not true. There is no silver-bullet "aiming system" that will magically allow you to
                   pocket shots with pro-level consistency. Pros aim virtually all shots subconsciously by instinct,
                   intuition, and feel based on countless past hours of practice and successful experience (see
                   "How the Pros Aim"). They typically do not use any particular prescribed "aiming system."
                   Although, they do usually have a consistent and purposeful pre-shot routine to help ensure they
                   aim and align accurately and consistently. The only way to truly improve your aiming accuracy
                   and consistency is through dedicated and smart practice. Success comes from having a
                   consistent and purposeful pre-shot routine, a reliable and accurate stroke, and a long history of
                   experience.

     28. The only way to learn to aim is to play 10,000 hours or "hit a million balls."

                   It can certainly help to practice a lot and gain lots of experience, but an understanding of aiming
                   principles, having a consistent and purposeful pre-shot routine, and knowing how to adjust aim
                   when using english can certainly speed the learning process.

     29. The best place to aim at a pocket is always the center between the pocket points.

                   The effective "center" of the pocket changes with speed and angle (see pocket "size" and
                   "center"). Also, sometimes the pocket needs to be "cheated" (with the OB aimed away from the
                   center of the pocket) for CB control purposes.

     30. Bridge length and shot distance have no effect on pivot-based aiming systems.

                   Unfortunately, that is not true (see pivot-based aiming system issues and CTE analysis and
                   evaluation).

     31. Aiming systems that use a limited number of lines of aim or aiming alignments can be used
         to pocket shots over a wide range of cut angles without adjusting by intuition or "feel" (either
         consciously or subconsciously) between the references.

                   Unfortunately, this is simply not true (see limited lines or alignment of aim and CTE analysis and
                   evaluation). Regardless, an "aiming system" can still be a valuable addition to a person's game,
                   especially if they don't already have a consistent and purposeful pre-shot routine. An "aiming
                   system" can help encourage a person to actually aim while standing, before they get down on a
                   shot, which is important. There are also other potential benefits of "aiming systems."

     32. Marketing information and claims concerning "aiming systems" are usually modest and
         totally realistic.

                   Unfortunately, "aiming systems" promotion sometimes involves exaggerated "marketing claims"
                   (e.g., see the DAM marketing spoof).

Billiards Digest                                                                                            June, 2017
Cue Ball Control
     33. Center-of-table position is good for most shots.

                   This is simply not true. Center-table position is adequate for many shots; but for many others, the
                   center of the table is a terrible place to be.

     34. The CB always heads in the tangent-line direction.

                   The CB heads and persists along the tangent-line direction only for a stun shot (see the 90
                   degree rule). For shots with top or bottom spin, the CB initially heads in the tangent-line direction,
                   but it curves away (see the 30 degree rule and the draw-shot trisect system); and at slow speed,
                   it curves almost immediately (see CB path speed effects) to where the tangent-line motion isn't
                   even noticeable.

     35. On a lag shot, the best place to hit the CB is dead center.

                   Not true. The optimal speed-control tip height is 20% of the ball radius above center (see lag
                   shot).

     36. It is always best to leave yourself with an easy, nearly straight-in, shot.

                   This is true for the last shot in a game, but it is certainly not true in general. Contrary to what
                   many people think, a straight shot is much easier to hit accurately and consistently than a shot at
                   an angle (see straight-in shots). However, your position-control options are severely limited when
                   a shot is nearly straight in (see cue ball position control).

Follow and Draw Shots
     37. If you elevate the cue, you get more draw.

                   To get tighter-angle draw, cue elevation is required (see quick draw); however, for maximum
                   draw distance with a mostly straight shot, keeping the cue as level as possible is better (see draw
                   shot cue elevation effects).

     38. A closed bridge is better for draw shots.

                   This might be true for some people due to stroke flaws, but on open bridge can actually offer
                   significant advantages (see open vs. closed bridge).

     39. To get maximum draw, hit as close to the miscue limit as possible.

                   It is too risky to hit too close to the miscue limit, and less draw can result, especially with power
                   draw shots (see power draw technique advice).

     40. Draw is tougher on slick cloth because the backspin doesn't "bite" as much.

                   It can be more difficult to draw the CB back at a tight angle; but with a nearly straight shot, draw is
                   much easier on a slicker cloth (see cloth effects).

     41. If you have trouble with draw shots, there is something wrong with the cue, tip, cloth, or CB.

                   Difficulty with draw is almost always due to poor technique. You must keep your grip relaxed,
                   keep your cue as level as possible or appropriate, and accelerate smoothly into the ball (see draw
                   shot technique advice).

     42. Draw shot control is better with less tip offset and more speed.

                   Actually, the opposite is true. In general, for best draw distance control, use more spin with less
                   speed (see physics-based draw shot advice).

Billiards Digest                                                                                                June, 2017
     43. Draw shots are more accurate than follow shots.

                   This is definitely not true in general (see follow shot accuracy).

     44. Force-follow shots require an overspin hit on the CB.

                   That's not true. In fact, it is extremely difficult to create overspin off the tip (see natural roll,
                   maximum offset, and overspin).

English (sidespin)
     45. The only way to learn how to use english effectively is through experience.

                   Practicing many different types of shots many times can certainly be helpful; however, knowing
                   some basic systems for using english like BHE and FHE, and learning about squirt, swerve, and
                   throw effects, can dramatically speed the learning process and help one use english effectively
                   sooner than they might otherwise.

     46. More english can be applied with a swooping stroke.

                   A swooping stroke might help some people apply english more effectively, but a swoop is
                   certainly not required to get maximum sidespin (see stroke swoop).

     47. English is not required often in top-level play.

                   This is a common misconception; but in reality, top players use sidespin (often only in small
                   amounts) frequently in their games (e.g., to make small corrections when they get out of line, to
                   help the CB come more into the line of the next shot, to send the CB multiple rails with ease and
                   in natural directions, to help pocket steep rail cut shots, to change the angle of a kick, to throw a
                   ball in, to curve the CB slightly, etc.).

     48. Sidespin affects the path the CB takes off the OB.

                   This is not true for a stunned CB, and the effect is small with topspin and bottom-spin shots (see
                   30-degree and 90-degree rule sidespin effects). Generally, sidespin has a significant effect only
                   when the CB hits a cushion (where the rebound angle is changed). Throw shots are an exception
                   (see throw "hold" and "kill" shots).

     49. With frozen rail cut shots, always use a cushion-first hit with running english.

                   This can make steep-angle rail-cut shots much easier to pocket, but it is not necessary or even
                   helpful at small-angle shots. Also, whether you go ball-first or cushion-first with sidespin on rail
                   cut shots can make a big difference in CB control, and sometimes outside english is required to
                   create desired CB motion (see rail cut shots).

     50. To get the largest rebound-angle change off a cushion, hit the CB on the horizontal centerline
         (to the extreme left or right of center).

                   Actually, a drag shot resulting from a below-center hit with sidespin can be used to get a larger
                   sidespin effects off a cushion (see maximum sidespin effect).

            … to be continued …

    Stay tuned next month for the remainder of the list. For those who are really interested in this topic and
want to explore more or look ahead on your own, I have the complete list of 100 myths with links to supporting
resources available at billiards.colostate.edu/pool_myths.html. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                                              June, 2017
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor and author of The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards
book and DVD, the Video Encyclopedias of Pool Shots (VEPS), Pool Practice (VEPP) and Eight
Ball (VEEB), and the How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS) and Billiard University (BU) instructional DVD
series, all available at: DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   June, 2017
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/pool_myths_part_2_the_rest_of_the_list.pdf
title: Pool Myths Part 2 The Rest Of The List
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Pool Myths – Part 2: The Rest of the List”                                           ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu.
The reference numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    The pool world has been rife with myths and misconceptions throughout its sordid history. Fortunately,
with the wealth of excellent instructional books and videos and online resource now available, much of the
misinformation has been solidly debunked. However, some preconceptions and wrong assumptions are hard
to break in some people … especially pool “Old Timers” and the individuals they influence with their constant
spewing of pool mythology.

    This month, I am continuing a Pool Myth Buster series by listing the second half of my Top 100 List of
Pool and Billiards Myths. And over the next few months, I’ll pick some of the most entrenched pool myths and
do my best to debunk, bust, and explain them in detail. For now, here’s my categorized list. Last month, I
covered 1-50 in the categories of equipment, fundamentals, stroke, aiming, cue ball control, follow and draw,
and english (sidespin). This month, I list 51-100 in the categories of english (sidespin), squirt (cue ball
deflection), bank and kick shots, throw and spin transfer, break shot, jump and masse shots, fouls, pool
physics, and general advice.

    The list contains links to supporting resource pages referenced by the parenthetical “see ….” items in the
explanations below. All of the resources are available in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.

                           Dr. Dave’s Top 100 Pool and Billiards Myths ...
                                 Debunked, Busted and Explained
                                                 … continued from last month …

English (sidespin)
     51. When a ball is rolling with sidespin, it curves.

                   Actually, this is not true. When you first hit the CB with sidespin (with an elevated cue), the CB
                   swerves initially (while it is sliding), but once it starts rolling (with sidespin), it heads in a straight
                   line (see ball swerve and turn).

     52. "Helping english" should be used to pocket balls.

                   When spin is transferred to an object ball, the spin can help the pocket accept the ball if the spin
                   is in the "running" direction on the pocket facing; however, attempting to create "helping english"
                   by changing the way you hit a shot is generally not advisable (see "get in" english).

     53. A touch of inside english is the best choice for most shots.

                   Inside english can offer advantages with certain types of shots, but it is not always the best
                   choice (see inside english effects).

     54. Sidespin helps in breaking out a cluster with power.

                   Sidespin might offer a slight advantage in certain limited cluster situations, but this is just not true
                   in general.

Billiards Digest                                                                                                    July, 2017
Squirt (CB Deflection)
     55. You don't need to understand squirt, swerve, and throw to use english effectively.

                   With enough practice, an intuitive feel can be developed for these factors; however, a solid
                   understanding of squirt, swerve, and throw effects can speed the learning process and help one
                   use sidespin more effectively.

     56. Squirt varies with speed.

                   Not true. Squirt (CB deflection) is independent of shot speed. However, swerve does vary with
                   speed (and cue elevation, and conditions), so "net CB deflection" (AKA "squerve") does vary with
                   speed (see squirt speed effects).

     57. CB deflection is caused by cue stiffness.

                   This is not true; although, cue stiffness can be indirectly related to shaft endmass, which does
                   affect squirt (see cue endmass and stiffness effects).

     58. The butt of a cue has an effect on CB deflection.

                   This is not true. The amount of squirt a cue produces depends only on the endmass of the shaft
                   (see what causes squirt?).

     59. Tip type, hardness, and size significantly affect the amount of squirt.

                   Tests clearly show that this is not the case (see Cue and Tip Testing for Cue Ball Deflection, tip
                   hardness effects, and tip size and shape effects).

     60. Net CB deflection is not a concern for slow shots because swerve cancels squirt.

                   This is true in some situations, but it depends on shot distance and exact speed, cue elevation,
                   shaft CB deflection, and conditions (see squirt, swerve, and throw effects).

     61. Cue testing machines are the best way to test and compare shafts.

                   With carefully designed machines and testing procedures, this can be true; however, there are
                   many factors that can result in misleading data (see squirt robot test results and concerns).

Bank and Kick Shots
     62. Kick and bank shot aiming systems are not useful.

                   This is simply not true. Kick and bank shot aiming systems can be very effective when used
                   properly and with understanding of bank and kick effects.

     63. The "angle of reflection" is the same as the angle of "incidence" (i.e., a kick or bank comes
        off a cushion at the same angle at which it comes in).

                   This is the basis for many kick and bank shot aiming systems, and it is true at certain angles and
                   speeds, but this is not true in general (see bank and kick effects).

     64. Kick shot aiming is not affected by speed.

                   Not true. All kick-shot-system aims must be adjusted based on speed, spin, distance, and angle
                   effects (see bank and kick effects).

     65. Bank shot aiming is not affected by cut angle, speed, spin, or conditions.

                   Many aiming systems assume this; but to bank and kick effectively, it is important to understand
                   and have a feel for all bank and kick effects.

Billiards Digest                                                                                            July, 2017
     66. Slower speed is better for bank shots because the pocket is more accepting at slower
        speeds.

                   It is true that the effective size of the pocket can be larger at slower speeds, but fast speed offers
                   many advantages with bank shots (see advantages of fast-speed banks).

     67. Spin transfer is not an important effect with bank shots.

                   This is not true. In fact, certain types of bank shots cannot be made without spin transfer (see
                   spin transfer bank shots).

     68. With a cross-corner bank shot, a double kiss is likely if a line through the CB and OB goes
        through the pocket center.

                   This is close to true, but the more accurate line is through the near pocket facing (see how to
                   detect and avoid double kisses).

     69. Cue twisting is necessary for certain types of bank shots.

                   Somebody might be able to use cue twist to pocket certain shots, but this technique is certainly
                   not required or recommended (see stroke swoop and cue twist).

Throw and Spin Transfer
     70. CIT is constant for all cut angles and speeds.

                   This is not true. Cut-induced throw varies significantly with angle and speed. Maximum CIT, with
                   no sidespin, occurs with slow speed at about a 1/2-ball hit (see throw effects and maximum
                   throw).

     71. More spin creates more SIT.

                   This is one of those cases where more doesn't give more. Maximum spin-induced throw occurs
                   with slow speed and about 50% sidespin (see maximum throw).

     72. Frozen balls throw more than non-frozen balls.

                   When balls are frozen, maximum CIT results, but a stun shot can create the same throw (see
                   frozen-ball throw).

     73. A follow or draw shot throws the same amount as a stun shot of the same speed.

                   Not true. Follow and draw shots throw about half as much as stun shots (see throw draw and
                   follow effects).

     74. Outside english prevents cut-induced throw.

                   This is true only if the "gearing amount" of outside english is used (see gearing outside english).

     75. The amount of spin that can be transferred to an OB is insignificant.

                   This is not true. In fact, certain types of shots are not possible without spin transfer (see spin
                   transfer shots).

     76. Cling/skid/kick is caused by static electricity.

                   This was a common misconception in the past (especially with some people in the snooker
                   world), but it is simply not true. Cling is caused by chalk marks on the balls. It can also be caused
                   by some cleaning products and polishes (see cling/skid/kick). It is important to recognize that a
                   normal amount of throw (especially when the normal throw is large, as with slow stun shots or
                   slow small-cut-angle shots with sidespin) can sometimes be confused with cling/skid/kick (see

Billiards Digest                                                                                                July, 2017
                   maximum throw). Normal throw (even a large amount) is a direct result of throw physics effects,
                   and it is not due to something being wrong with the balls.

     77. Chalk brand has no effect on the frequency or amount of cling/skid/kick.

                   Careful tests have shown that the type of chalk does make a difference with the frequency and
                   amount of cling (see chalk brand comparison).

Break Shot
     78. CB hop during a break is a good thing.

                   CB hop on a break is often an indicator of an accurate and powerful break, but this is not
                   something one should force (e.g., by elevating the cue) because it represents lost energy (see
                   break hop and squat).

     79. The optimal break-cue weight is the same for everybody.

                   The best weight for a cue is a very individual thing (see optimal cue weight).

     80. Pattern racking is legal, and players who know the tricks should use them.

                   In most pool games (and under the official rules of pool), pattern racking is illegal and unethical;
                   although, knowing where certain balls in a rack tend to head is useful to know (see pattern
                   racking strategy).

     81. CB deflection is not a concern with a break cue.

                   If you use a break cue with a natural pivot length well matched to your bridge length, stroking
                   errors will not affect your accuracy (see pivot-length article).

Jump and Masse Shots
     82. It takes a lot of power to jump the ball.

                   The jump shot is about finesse and technique, not power (see jump shot technique advice).

     83. Aim through the center of the CB for best jump results.

                   For best jump results, it is actually better to aim between the center of the CB and resting point on
                   the cloth (see jump shot article).

     84. The dart stroke is not as effective as a normal stroke for jump shots.

                   With higher cue elevations, the dart stroke will be more comfortable and effective for many people
                   (see jump shot technique advice).

     85. If you over-cut a jump shot, it is because your aim was off or you had unintentional sidespin
        on the shot.

                   Jump shots are often over cut due to the CB hopping into the OB (see jump shot overcut effect).

     86. The only way to aim masse shots is by feel.

                   Masse shots do require feel to judge speed effects, but the Coriolis aiming system can be very
                   helpful in choosing a line of aim.

Billiards Digest                                                                                               July, 2017
Fouls
     87. Hitting into a CB frozen to OB is a foul because it results in a double hit or push.

                   This is simply not true; and under standard WPA rules, this type of shot is legal (see frozen cue
                   ball shots).

     88. Miscues are usually not double hits.

                   Actually, most miscues do involve secondary contact. Regardless, miscues are not considered
                   fouls unless they are intentional or if there is obvious visual proof of secondary contact (see
                   miscue fouls).

     89. "Scoop" jump shots always involve a miscue.

                   It is possible to hit a "scoop" shot without a miscue, but this sort of shot is still illegal (see illegal
                   "scoop" jump shot).

     90. If the CB and OB are frozen (or if there is a small gap), angling the cue at 45 degrees (or
        more) horizontally or vertically is enough to avoid a foul.

                   This is not true (see double hit detection and avoidance).

     91. With a straight shot where there is a small gap between the CB and OB, if the CB advances
        forward more than a chalk's width, the shot is a foul.

                   This is simply not true (see double hit detection and avoidance).

Pool Physics
     92. What the stroke or grip does during tip contact makes a difference.

                   What the grip or arm does during the incredibly brief tip-contact time has no practical effect on the
                   outcome of a shot (see grip tightness effects and stroke acceleration).

     93. The manner in which the cue is stroked can change the outcome of a shot (for a given tip
        contact point and cue speed at contact).

                   The "style" of "quality" of stroke has no effect on the outcome of a shot, for a given tip contact
                   point and stroke speed (see stroke "type" and "quality").

     94. Tip/CB contact time is increased by "accelerating through" the CB.

                   Not true. The ball contact time varies some with cue speed and tip hardness, but the type of
                   stroke has no practical effect (see cue tip contact time).

General Advice
     95. Practice makes perfect.

                   Only perfect practice makes perfect. If all you do is reinforce bad habits, or if you fail to learn and
                   develop understanding during practice, it won't help your game much. In fact, "practice can make
                   permanent" the wrong things.

     96. Drills won't make you play better.

                   Drills can be very useful to help you efficiently use practice time to develop specific skills that can
                   help you improve your overall game the most (see why do drills).

Billiards Digest                                                                                                    July, 2017
      97. Natural talent is more important than hard work.

                   For certain sports (e.g., anything involving jumping or speed like some track and field events), this
                   can be true. Also, someone with good eye-hand coordination (e.g., from genetics and/or previous
                   experience with other activities and sports) will have an advantage over someone who is not very
                   coordinated. It also helps to have sharp vision and good visual perception. However, practice,
                   experience, and hard work are the most important ingredients of success in pool. See also: what
                   it takes to play like a pro.

      98. Pro Players make the best instructors.

                   A session with an experienced, qualified, and professional instructor can often be much more
                   helpful, regardless of the current or past level of play of the instructor (see selecting an
                   instructor).

      99. Safeties are for sissies.

                   This is ridiculous. Defensive play is a very important part of high-level pool. One should always
                   play safe when it increases your chances of winning a game.

      100. I lost because of "bad rolls."

                   Bad luck and a "bad roll" can sometimes cause a loss of game; but, in general these things can
                   be avoided by better play. Generally, the better you are, the "luckier" you get (i.e., you need to be
                   good to get lucky). Also, occasional "good luck" and "good rolls" tend to balance out the "bad
                   luck" and "bad rolls."

    For those who are really interested in this topic and want to explore more on your own, the complete list
of 100 myths with links to supporting resources are available at billiards.colostate.edu/pool_myths.html.
Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor and author of The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards
book and DVD, the Video Encyclopedias of Pool Shots (VEPS), Pool Practice (VEPP) and Eight
Ball (VEEB), and the How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS) and Billiard University (BU) instructional DVD
series, all available at: DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                               July, 2017
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/pool_myths_part_3_open_vs_closed_bridge.pdf
title: Pool Myths Part 3 Open Vs Closed Bridge
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Pool Myths – Part 3: Open Vs. Closed Bridge”                                 ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu.
The reference numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    The pool world has been rife with myths and misconceptions throughout its sordid history. Fortunately,
with the wealth of excellent instructional books and videos and online resource now available, much of the
misinformation has been solidly debunked. However, some preconceptions and wrong assumptions are hard
to break in some people … especially pool “Old Timers” and the individuals they influence with their constant
spewing of pool mythology.

    In the June and July issues, I presented my categorized list of Top 100 Pool and Billiards Myths. In this
installment of the Pool Myth Buster series, I want to take a closer look at Myth 12 on the list:

          12. A closed bridge is better than an open bridge.

                   This might be true for some people and some shots, especially if one has stroke flaws, but it
                   is not true in general.

    In the days of yore, most pool players used a closed bridge for most shots, and many pool players still do;
but there seems to be a trend in the last 10-20 years toward using an open bridge. I think the reason is that
an open bridge offers many advantages. Many players and instructors still think a closed bridge is better for
draw and power shots, but I firmly believe an open bridge is better for most players and most shots, including
draw and power shots. It doesn't look as fancy as the wide variety of closed bridges people use (see the
“closed bridge variations” resource page in the “bridge” FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu), but an open
bridge offers the following advantages.

          1. It is very easy to learn and master, even for beginners.

          2. It provides an unobscured view of the shaft, especially with a low stance, to help with aiming and
             establishing the stroking direction.

          3. It is very stable, even at fairly large heights, with the heel of the hand on the table and the
             knuckles raised up.

          4. It keeps the shaft centered and unrestricted in the V-shape through the entire stroke, even with
             significant shaft taper. This is not the case with many closed bridges.

          5. It offers the least and most consistent resistance to cue movement, especially with hot, humid,
             and/or dirty conditions; although, a pool glove can help limit these concerns.

          6. It offers a greater range of bridge heights. It can be easily flattened to a low cue position, and can
             be raised higher when bridging over a ball or shooting jacked-up shots.

          7. It makes it easier to reach extended shots, as an option to using a mechanical bridge.

     Now, some people don't like the cue leaving their bridge hand, which can occur with an open bridge on
power shots with english; but as long as there is no risk of hitting nearby obstacle balls (in which case, a
closed bridge might be advisable), this is not really an issue since the CB is already gone before the shaft
moves in the bridge (see more on this below). The cue can also leave the bridge hand on draw shots with
follow through into the table; but, again, the CB is long gone before this happens.

    There has been an increasing trend toward using a lower stance (with the chin close to the cue) and an
open bridge in the pool world, and practically all snooker players use a low stance and an open bridge. This
is no surprise since accuracy is so important with tighter pool pockets (another pool trend in recent times) and
in snooker, where the table is huge and the pockets are tiny. A low stance, with the chin on or just over the
cue, offers the following advantages:
Billiards Digest                                                                                        August, 2017
          a) It makes it easier to be consistent with your visual alignment (for more info, see the “vision center”
             FAQ page). With the chin so close to the cue, it is easier to see (or even feel) whether or not you
             are off to one side or the other.

          b) Being closer to the cue allows you to sight more along the cue (especially with an open bridge),
             similar to a marksman looking down the barrel of a gun. This can help you better visualize the
             line of the shot.

          c) There is less eye movement between the cue ball (CB) and object ball (OB) while checking the tip
             position and aiming line in the set position.

          d) It is easier to visualize and create the exact tip position desired.

      Diagram 1 includes still images from the 2:32 point in part 2 of NV B.96. They clearly show that the CB is
long gone before any shaft motion in the bridge occurs. In Diagram 1a, the tip is first making contact with the
CB. In Diagram 1b, which is one thousandth of a second later, the CB is already starting to leave the tip and
the part of the shaft on the bridge hand has still not moved. In Diagram 1c, two thousandths of a second after
initial contact, there is a gap between the CB and the tip, and the part of the shaft on the bridge has still not
moved. Notice how the end of the shaft is flexed quite a bit at this time. During the rest of the motion (see
NV B.96), the CB continues to separate from the tip and the bridge hand finally feels sideways motion and
vibration of the shaft. The shaft actually reaches maximum flex sideways well after the CB separates from the
tip (see the “cue vibration” FAQ resource page for clear demonstrations of this). Since the CB is long gone
before the shaft interacts with the bridge hand, the type of bridge can have no effect on the action of the shot.

                                              a) just before tip contact

Billiards Digest                                                                                        August, 2017
                                   b) during tip contact

                                  c) just after tip contact

                   Diagram 1 Cue flex during a fast-speed sidespin shot

Billiards Digest                                                          August, 2017
    Now for people who tend to lift the tip up during a stroke, especially with shots requiring more power, a
closed bridge can help ensure a more-accurate tip contact point and help prevent possible miscues.
However, tip lift is due to stroke flaws, usually grip tightening and/or elbow drop during the stroke into the ball.
So tip lift is a stroke fundamentals issues … not a bridge issue. In my opinion, eliminating the grip or stroke
flaws is a better approach than using a closed bridge as a “Band-Aid” to limit bad consequences of poor
technique.

     As clearly demonstrated above, whether the bridge is closed or open really has no effect on the CB,
except for the fact that the increased friction associated with a closed bridge could reduce power and control
a small amount. Now, some rail bridges, especially when cueing low close to a cushion, do require a closed
bridge. And psychologically, there could be advantages to a closed bridge. For example, some people just
feel more secure with a closed bridge.

     For demonstrations of most of the concepts related to both open and closed bridges, view parts 1 and 2
of online video NV B.96. And for those who are really interested in Pool Myths and want to explore more on
your own, the complete list of 100 myths with links to supporting resources are available at
billiards.colostate.edu/pool_myths.html. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV B.96 – Grip and bridge technique and advice
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor and author of The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards
book and DVD, the Video Encyclopedias of Pool Shots (VEPS), Pool Practice (VEPP) and Eight
Ball (VEEB), and the How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS) and Billiard University (BU) instructional DVD
series, all available at: DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        August, 2017
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/pool_myths_part_4_ld_shafts.pdf
title: Pool Myths Part 4 Ld Shafts
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Pool Myths – Part 4: LD Shafts”                                            ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu.
The reference numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    The pool world has been rife with myths and misconceptions throughout its history. Fortunately, with the
wealth of excellent instructional books and videos and online resource now available, much of the
misinformation has been solidly debunked. However, some preconceptions and wrong assumptions are hard
to break in some people … especially pool “Old Timers” and those they influence with their constant
perpetuation of pool mythology.

    In the June and July issues, I presented my categorized list of Top 100 Pool and Billiards Myths. In this
installment of the Pool Myth Buster series, I want to take a closer look at the myths related to low-CB-
deflection (LD) shafts:

     4.     LD shafts allow you to put more spin on the ball.

     5.     A smaller-diameter shaft/tip allows you to put more spin on the ball.

     6.     LD shafts are better than non-LD shafts.

     7.     When you switch from a regular non-LD shaft to an LD shaft, you won't need to change the
            way you play.

    First, let’s address Myth 4. An LD shaft cannot put more spin on the ball. Period! Now, for a given tip
offset from center, an LD shaft will create slightly more sidespin than a non-LD shaft. However, as
demonstrated in HSV B.47, a non-LD shaft can hit farther out on the ball (with a larger apparent miscue limit)
than an LD shaft, so the amount of spin that can be applied to the CB is the same. Diagram 1 illustrates
these effects. Diagram 1a shows that with an LD shaft, the amount of squirt (CB deflection) is small and the
effective tip offset from center is about the same as the actual tip offset from center. Diagram 1b, which is
exaggerated for clarity, shows that with more squirt, the actual tip offset from center needs to be much greater
to achieve the same effective tip offset. The amount of sidespin produced will be the same for both shots
(close to maximum, at the miscue limit), but where you need to hit the CB to get the desired sidespin for each
shaft will be slightly different.

     As documented in my September, 2007 BD article, a typical LD shaft has a squirt angle of about 1.8º at
close to maximum tip offset, as compared to 2.5º for a typical regular-squirt cue. So an LD shaft offers only
about 30% less squirt than a typical non-LD shaft. Per TP B.7, which calculates the effective offsets using
these squirt angles, the percentage change in effective tip offset and the resulting spin for a given actual tip
offset is only 2-3%, so the effect is very small, much smaller than as illustrated in Diagram 1. Regardless, this
effect does not imply that you can get a larger effective offset and more spin with an LD shaft. You can’t!
Although, in comparing an LD to a non-LD shaft, you do need to aim slightly differently and hit a slightly
different spot on the CB to send it in the desired direction with the desired amount of spin. For more
information, see the “getting more spin with an LD shaft” resource page in the “cue” FAQ section at
billiards.colostate.edu.

Billiards Digest                                                                                  September, 2017
                   Diagram 1 Effective tip offset with LD and non-LD shafts (exaggerated)

     Concerning Myth 5, it might seem to some people that a small-diameter shaft allows you to put more spin
on the ball, but there are logical reasons to explain this false belief. When comparing cues and/or tips, it is
important that the tip offset is the same for both. If the tip size and shape are different, and one uses "tips of
english" as a measure, perceived tip offset can be very different than actual offset, resulting in significant
differences in the amount of spin. LD shafts typically have smaller-diameter tips than non-LD shafts.
Because of this, a person might tend to place the tip farther from center than with a thicker non-LD shaft.
Obviously, this would apply more spin to the CB (as long as the tip contact point is within the miscue limit).
The shape of the tip can also make a difference. For more information, see “cue tip size and shape effects”
resource page in the “cue tip” FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu. Also, with draw shots, if someone is
accustomed to a larger shaft that is close to touching the cloth at CB address, and they place a smaller-
diameter shaft in that same apparent position (close to the cloth), the effective tip contact point offset on the
ball will be lower.

    Concerning Myth 6, LD shafts are not better than non-LD shafts for all people. For some people, LD
shafts offer the following advantages:

     a) The CB will come off the cue tip closer to the aiming line when using sidespin. Therefore, not as
        much aim adjustment or compensation is required when using sidespin. For people who aren't good
        at compensating for squirt, this can be very helpful. Also, with less compensation, there will be less
        error. For more info, see my December, 2007 BD article.

     b) A player might be more consistent with shots with sidespin since the possible range of squirt is
        smaller than with regular shafts. Basically, if there is less squirt then less aiming adjustment is
        required. For more info, see my December, 2007 BD article.

     c) Back-hand and/or front-hand english (BHE and FHE) aim-and-pivot aim compensation methods might
        be more suited to a player's natural bridge length with an LD shaft. For more information, see the
        “BHE/FHE” resource page in the “english” FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.

     d) With a bridge length well matched to the natural pivot length of a shaft, the effects of any stroke
        swoop (intentional or unintentional) will be canceled. This can be particularly useful with a break cue,
        where stroking errors are more likely. For more info, see Diagram 4 in my November, 2007 BD
        article.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   September, 2017
     e) Squirt resulting from unintentional english due to slight errors in off-center alignment will be
        minimized.

     f)   Many LD shafts are constructed as a radial laminate (long wedge-shaped sections glued together and
          then turned down on a lathe), so they are more likely to hold their straightness over time (i.e., they are
          less likely to warp). If the wood laminates are chosen carefully (e.g., with a certain grain orientations),
          this might help improve strength. Also, this could help with consistency from one shaft to another of
          the same model. Some people think the radial consistency also helps create a more consistent "hit,"
          regardless of the orientation (twist angle) of the cue, but this effect is questionable. Some people
          think radial consistency also helps create more consistent squirt, but that effect is also questionable
          (see my February, 2008 BD article).

But for other people, LD shafts can offer the following disadvantages:

          a) LD shafts currently available can be expensive.

          b) If somebody is used to compensating aim with a higher-squirt cue, it might be difficult to adjust to
             the lower-squirt cue.

          c) Some people might not like the "feel" or "hit" or "sound" or "look" of an LD shaft.

          d) It can be more difficult to masse or jump the CB (e.g., when wanting to jump over just the edge of
             a ball) with an LD shaft.

          e) Some people might not like the small shaft diameter or taper of some LD shafts, especially if a
             closed bridge is used.

          f)       An LD shaft might not be as mechanically sound over long-term use (i.e., the shaft end is not as
                   strong and tough).

          g) If someone hits lots of low-speed sidespin shots, and he or she is used to a higher squirt helping
             to cancel some or all of the swerve, then he or she might have trouble adjusting to an LD shaft
             (where more swerve compensation would be required for these shots).

          h) LD shafts have long natural pivot lengths, which might not be appropriate for either BHE or FHE
             on certain shots. Therefore, there is no simple aim-and-pivot squirt-compensation method ... a
             "combination" of BHE and FHE will be required. For more info, see the “BHE/FHE” resource
             page in the “english” FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.

          i)       If you have a short bridge length, an LD shaft could result in more directional error (as compared
                   to a regular squirt cue with a shorter pivot length) due to any unintentional pivot during your
                   stroke.

          j)       If you are used to an LD shaft, and you find yourself in a place without your cue, where only
                   regular-squirt cues are available, you might not play very well (until you can adjust).

          k) An LD shaft will not make it easier to compensate for swerve and throw. To aim shots with
             sidespin, many factors need to be taken into consideration. For more info, see “aim
             compensation for squirt, swerve, and throw” in the “aiming” FAQ section at
             billiards.colostate.edu

      Concerning Myth 7, if you change from a non-LD shaft to an LD shaft, you will most definitely need to
change the way you aim when using sidespin (per the info above). A non-LD shaft produces more CB squirt
off line, so you need to angle your aim slightly to compensate. You also need to aim off-line with an LD shaft
when applying sidespin, but the amount you need to compensate is less.

     I hope this article helps dispel some of the myths out there concerning LD shafts. For those who are
really interested in Pool Myths and want to explore more on your own, the complete list of 100 myths with
links to supporting resources are available at billiards.colostate.edu/pool_myths.html. Enjoy!

Billiards Digest                                                                                       September, 2017
Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   HSV B.47 – Effect of shaft endmass and squirt on miscue limit
high-speed video

                   TP B.7 – Effect of squirt on the amount of spin
technical proof

PS:
      •      I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
             familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
             please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor and author of the book: The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards and the instructional DVD series: Video Encyclopedias of Pool Shots (VEPS), Pool
Practice (VEPP), Eight Ball (VEEB), and Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT), How to Aim Pool Shots
(HAPS) and Billiard University (BU), all available at: DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                 September, 2017
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/pool_quizzes.pdf
title: Pool Quizzes
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Pool Quizzes”                                                            ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Do you think you know a lot about pool? Well, here’s your chance to prove it. I recently created and
posted a set of Pool Quizzes to test how much you really know. The quizzes, which test how well you know
the game's terminology, pool physics principles, and rules, can be found on the Instructor and Student
resource page at billiards.colostate.edu. They are also described and demonstrated in online video NV
J.92. In this article, I summarize all important highlights from the video.

     The first quiz tests your knowledge of pool terminology. Image 1 shows the first 5 questions of the quiz,
which includes 50 questions total. The quiz is available as a PDF file that you can print or view on a computer
or tablet. You can grade yourself using the provided answer key (also a PDF file). Alternatively, you can take
the quiz online on any device with automatic scoring. If you want to study up before taking the quiz, visit the
linked Terminology resource page which includes a video that defines and demonstrates all important terms.
You can also look up any term or phrase you don’t know in the linked billiards glossary.

                                      Image 1 Pool Terminology Quiz

Billiards Digest                                                                                   October, 2021
     The second quiz tests your knowledge of pool physics principles. Image 2 shows the first 5 questions of
the quiz, which includes 50 questions total. Again, you can use the PDF file, or you can take the quiz online.
If you want to study up for this quiz, visit the linked Pool Physics resource page. The most useful resources
are the CB control tutorial, the sidespin tutorial, and the squirt/swerve/throw effects page. Be sure to watch
the linked “Everything You Need to Know About CB Control” (NV J.27) and the “Everything You Need to
Know About Sidespin” videos (NV J.29). Also watch the other videos and read through the list of effects on
the squirt/swerve/throw effects page. These resources cover all important pool physics principals. In a
follow-up video, I will demonstrate the answers to all questions on the pool physics quiz with shots at a pool
table, so be sure to subscribe to my YouTube Channel so you don’t miss it.

                                        Image 2 Pool Physics Quiz

Billiards Digest                                                                                  October, 2021
    The third quiz tests your knowledge and application of the official rules of pool. Again, you can use the
PDF version, or you can take it online (see Image 3). There is also an Excel spreadsheet with automatic
scoring if you prefer that. You need to watch shot videos as you take the quiz, where you answer fair or foul
after each shot. There are 100 shots total to judge. Everything you need to take the quiz, including the shot
videos can be found on the Pool Rules Quiz resource page. Feel free to pause the videos, and rewind as
necessary, as you answer the questions. All answers are available in a PDF file answer key and in video
demonstrations. There is also a collection of instructional videos covering various situations that you might
want to study up on before or after the quiz. And if you want to learn more, the linked resource pages offer
many more videos and additional useful information. All pool players should be familiar with the official rules
of pool and be able to score high on the pool rules quiz.

                                         Image 3 Pool Rules Quiz

    The pool quiz resource page also has a link to the Billiard University (BU) Playing-Ability Exams that you
can use to test and rate how well you play. The first BU Exam tests important fundamental pool skills. All the
documents you need to take and score the Exams are freely available on the BU website, including tools for
automatic scoring. The score you get on the first Exam places you into the appropriate version of the 2nd
Exam that tests how well you apply pool skills in various game situations. Your combined score on BU
Exams I and II can be used to estimate your player rating. And the BU Rating Comparison table (see Image
4) shows how BU Scores correlate with FargoRatings, common league handicaps, and other player rating
systems. You can also get a pool diploma from the Billiard University if you score high enough. Give the
Exams a try to see how you stack up against many others who have already gotten their pool diplomas.
There are many useful resources on the BU website for learning more about the Exams and the diploma
process. Be sure to check out the videos showing Shane VanBoening taking BU Exams I and II. Also watch
the videos for the best performances to date on all the Exams. See how close you come to the top scores by
Belarus pro Margaret Fefilova and German pro Tobias Bongers, who won the last BU Exam Challenge. Their
scores won’t be easy to beat, but a perfect score of 100 is possible.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   October, 2021
                                        Image 3 BU Rating Comparison Table

      Have fun with the quizzes and exams, and good luck with your game from Dr. Dave!

                    NV J.27 – CUE BALL CONTROL … Everything You Need to Know
                    NV J.29 – SIDESPIN … Everything You Need to Know
normal video        NV J.92 – Test Your POOL KNOWLEDGE … Take Dr. Dave’s Pool QUIZZES and EXAMS

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     October, 2021
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/pool_vs_cats.pdf
title: Pool Vs Cats
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Pool vs. Cats”                                                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the articles help
you locate the resources on the website.

    Unless you have lived under a rock the last twenty years, you probably already know there is an endless supply of
adorable cat videos on YouTube. But wouldn’t you like to watch some equally-entertaining pool videos that are interesting
or cute. If so, then the following viewing guide will be of interest.

     Over the years, I have collected links to miscellaneous fun pool videos that don’t fit into conventional “categories.” All
of them are available in the “Miscellaneous Interesting Videos” section of the Online Video Collection at
billiards.colostate.edu. I thought it would be fun to pique your interest by showing some images from the videos.

     Let’s start with some TV ads that have appeared over the years, mostly in the 1970s and 1980s. Bud Light had an
interesting ad featuring a ladies-only pool tournament where some guys wanting an easy cash dressed up for the part
(see Image 1). Another featured a special chicken who could play pool by laying cue balls, sometimes at impressive
velocity (see Image 2).

                   Image 1 Bud Light Ladies Tournament                Image 2 Bud Light pool-playing chicken

     If you prefer Miler Light over Bud Light, you can watch Steve Mizerak shoot a fun sequence of three trick shots in a
single take (see Image 3) or watch him try to convince a bunch of celebrities of the time, including famous comedian
Rodney Dangerfield, that Miller being “Less Filling” is more important than it “Tasting Great” (see Image 4). I always
thought that was an odd advertising ploy, trying to convince potential customers that the beer’s taste isn’t as important as
it having fewer calories.

               Image 3 Miller Light Mizerak trick shots               Image 4 Miller Light Mizerak less filling

     Another funny ad is the “history of pool” by Guinness, showing in a hilarious way how and why the cue, rails, and
pockets were invented (see Image 5). Hitting the CB with your finger made it sore after a while, and it got old chasing
down and picking up balls from the floor. This and all the other beer-ad videos are worth a watch if you haven’t seen them
yet.
Billiards Digest                                                                                                      April, 2021
                                           Image 5 Guinness history of pool

     Now let’s look at some TV shows and movies that have included interesting pool moments. In the greatest pool
movie of all time “The Color of Money,” Tom Cruise was being a fool twirling the cue around like a ninja “Last Samurai”
warrior (see Image 6). A Wushu Asian martial arts gymnast using a cue as a prop goes well beyond this (see Image 7).
Tom Cruise’s pool game wasn’t great in the movie since most of the shots he actually played were easy setup shots, but
“his hair was perfect” as he mouthed lyrics from the song "Werewolves of London" playing in the background (see Image
8).

          Image 6 Ninja Tom Cruise             Image 7 Mushu cue acrobat                 Image 8 Tom Cruise hair

    Comedian Bill Murray became a skilled pool hustler with all the time he had in one of my favorite movies of all time:
“Ground Hog Day” (see Image 9). And in a 1961 episode of “The Twilight Zone,” pool shark Jesse Cardiff (Jack
Klugman) faces off against the devil spirit of "Fats" Brown (Jonathan Winters) for the challenge of his life … literally (see
Image 10).

             Image 9 “Ground Hog Day”                        Image 10 Twilight Zone game of your life
Billiards Digest                                                                                                    April, 2021
   Sometimes ad agencies use fancy video editing and computer graphics to create pool shots not possible. In an ad for
GrandOptical Eyeglasses, famous French soccer player Zinedine Zidane pockets 8 balls in one shot, all in the same
pocket, obviously due to the effectiveness of the eyeglasses (see Image 11).

                                           Image 11 French eyeglasses ad

    There are lots of videos out there of various configurations of playing pool robots (see Image 12). If you watch the
videos, you can rest assured that the technology is a long way from even threatening a “bar banger” … for now anyway.

                                            Image 12 Pool-playing robot

    Now for some cute pool videos to rival some of the adorable cat videos out there. How about famous trick shots
executed on a tiny toy pool table … so cute (see Image 13)? And how about a chihuahua-playing-pool (see Image 14).
Apparently, he doesn’t know the rules very well, because he is shooting the 8. And how could you go wrong with Donald
Duck learning to play 3-cushion billiards in Disney’s “Donald in Mathmagic Land” (see Image 15)? You can watch Barbi
and GI Joe play a game of pool in stop-motion animation (see Image 16).

Billiards Digest                                                                                               April, 2021
            Image 13                 Image 14                    Image 15                    Image 16

    Those sneaky cats can even make cameo appearances in pool videos. Check out the massé shot video with a cat
assist (see Image 17). Even pool videos are more adorable with cats.

                                       Image 17 Cat cameo appearance

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at: DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        April, 2021
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/pre_stance_routine.pdf
title: Pre Stance Routine
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Pre-Stance Routine”                                                          ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     Recently, I posted online video NV J.40 that takes a look at a new approach to the pre-stance routine –
the steps you follow to get down into your best personal stance. In general, you should not try to emulate
somebody’s stance or force your body into a “textbook” or an “orthodox” position. The ideal stance can vary a
lot from one person to the next based on body type, height, natural feet angles (especially if you are pigeon
toed or duck footed), back/neck/hip/leg flexibility and strength, chest and belly sizes, etc. For demonstrations
related to generally recommended stance “best practices,” differences between the pool and snooker
stances, and advice for how to find your personal best stance, see my previous stance videos: NV D.7 and
NV J.21.

      There are two common approaches to the pre-stance routine. One is to first stand behind the cue, where
you can visualize the line of the shot from a comfortable standing position. Then you walk into the stance by
first placing your back foot on or close to the shot line. And then you step to the side with the front foot, trying
to keep your head over the line of the shot the entire time. Notice in NV J.40 how my face is square to the
shot and along the shot line during the entire pre-stance routine. Another common pre-stance routine is to
start with the back foot already in the final position, with your head again over the shot line. Then you just
move the front foot forward and out as you bring your head straight down.

                                        Image 1 New Starting Position

     Recently, I have evolved my pre-stance routine into the following. As shown in Image 1, I first lock my
vision over the shot line and place my feet in the final stance positions. I waggle and adjust a bit until
everything feels and looks perfect. At the same time, I am aiming and aligning while standing. My head and
grip hand are along the shot line before dropping into my stance. I lock my eyes on my object ball (OB) target
(or ghost-ball position) along the required line of the shot. This helps guide me straight down and helps me

Billiards Digest                                                                                        August, 2020
align the cue along the necessary shot line. I call this my laser-guided drop, thinking of my eye gaze as laser
beams intensely focused on my target. I do not look at the cue ball (CB) until I am already down to fine tune
the position of the tip; although, I can see the CB in my peripheral vision as I drop down. If your feet and
head are in the right places, the tip will automatically end up where you want after a little practice. With a
good pre-stance routine, including aiming and aligning while standing, there will be less need to adjust your
aim or alignment once you are down on the shot.

     Remember to always start your pre-stance routine with your head and eyes in the right place, with your
personal vision center over the shot line. For more information, see the “vision center” FAQ page at
billiards.colostate.edu. With your vision center aligned properly, you then place the feet and body relative to
your vision-center head position. And keep your head over the shot line during the entire pre-stance routine.
Do not start with your head offline and bring it in from the side as you drop into the stance. It will be very
difficult to align accurately and consistently with this approach. Again, start with your vision center over the
shot line.

   To get down into the stance, you can bend at the waist and/or bend at the knees as necessary based on
comfort. I am tall and like to get my chin close to the cue, and I prefer deep knee bend to limit discomfort in
my neck, back, and hamstring (see Image 2a). You can also widen your feet to help get your body lower
more easily.

    If you have trouble with your chest or belly being in the way during the stroke, you can move your back
foot back and front foot forward to create more clearance. As shown in Image 2b, this results in a more
closed stance. The disadvantage is: more neck and back contortion will be required to get the face square
with the eyes level since the face will naturally point away from the shot. If you do not have trouble with
clearance, but you experience neck or back discomfort, you might consider opening your stance slightly, by
bringing the front foot back and/or the back foot forward (see Image 2a). All of this will depend on your body
type and situation, and you might not be able to have your face totally square with your eyes perfectly level,
but that is okay. All you can do is move around to find the best you can do without too much discomfort.

                    (a) open stance                                         (b) closed stance

                                      Image 2 Open and closed stance

    You should keep the grip hand along the shot line (with the head also over the shot line) as you drop
down into your stance. You can even bring the entire cue into the line (pointing up) before getting down (see
Image 3a), so everything comes into and stays along the line of the shot the entire time. And as shown in
Image 3b, you can also pre-place the cue with the tip at the CB and place the bridge hand under the cue as
you drop down.

    If you have trouble figuring out how close to stand to the CB and where to place your feet, you can work
backwards from your stance to find the required feet positions, and to see where your grip hand is relative to
your hip when you are standing. As demonstrated in NV J.40, when practicing, you can place the tip at the
CB, place your grip hand on the cue at your normal position, move your feet forward until the grip hand is in
the right position relative to your hip, and then waggle to place your feet more accurately. This technique can
be used with the other pre-stance approaches also.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     August, 2020
                     (a) cue along shot line                                     (b) tip on shot line

                                     Image 3 Cue and tip along shot line

    You can also use a mirror to help practice your head positioning and laser-guided drop. You can place a
stand-up mirror in front of the table, use a stool in front of bedroom wall mirror, or bridge on a bathroom
counter. This will let you visually confirm that your head drops straight down with your face square and eyes
level.

    If you need to make significant adjustments after you are down, you should get up and restart the
process. You need to be careful to not adjust your aim too much while down on the shot because you cannot
see the angles as well in the low position. You need to learn to trust the aim and alignment you established
while standing. Sometimes it can help to first look at the shot from far away (and even crouch down with a
one-eyed squint) to see how straight a shot might be or to make sure there is clearance past obstacle balls.
This can also be helpful when the CB and OB are close together with a cut angle. Standing farther away and
with a tall look might help you better see the required angle and line of the shot.

     One advantage of my new approach is that you are closer to the table with a higher look at the shot,
where you can better see the shot angle and required aiming line. Also, by carefully placing each foot before
getting down, they are more likely to end up in the right positions. Also, the new approach encourages you to
spend a little extra time aligning and aiming while standing, before getting down into your stance. This is
probably one of the most important elements of any pre-shot routine, so doing it more carefully can only help.
Be sure to practice with any changes you make to your pre-stance routine. You need to groove it in so it
becomes automatic … in other words, your new “natural.”

     One disadvantage of the new approach is: you need to start with your head in a slightly unnatural
position, but it is not hard to find the position since it is over the shot line (especially if you do the mirror
practice). Another possible disadvantage is you might not accurately place the bridge hand on the table by
“helicoptering down,” as compared to sliding in from farther away. However, with practice, I think either
approach is equally good, and it is still possible to slide in some with the new method.

     Again, you should use whatever approach works best for you. It does not make much difference how you
arrive at your stance as long as you can do so accurately and consistently. I have found that what works best
for me is my new pre-stance routine, where I place everything carefully before getting down. I hope the new
approach helps you too. Be sure to watch online video NV J.40 that demonstrates everything described in
this article.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                                        August, 2020
                    NV D.7 – Pool Fundamentals – The Stance – from Vol-I of the Billiard University instructional
                        video series
normal video
                    NV J.21 – How to Find the Perfect Pool/Snooker/Billiards Stance
                    NV J.40 – Pre-Stance Routine … A New Approach

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          August, 2020
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/pro_foul_confusion.pdf
title: Pro Foul Confusion
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Pro Foul Confusion”                                                        ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     Did you see Skyler Woodward’s controversial shot during the recent European Open (see Image 1)? A
foul was called by experienced referee Marcel Eckardt. This led to much debate on social media. Check out
the shot at the beginning of online video NV L.62 and decide if you think Marcel made the right call or not. In
the remainder of that video, and in this column, I try to convincingly settle the argument once and for all.

                   Image 1 Sky Woodward’s controversial shot at the 2024 European Open

     In the previous shot that led to the situation (also show in the video), Sky was trying to break out the 6-9
cluster and left the cue ball (CB) very close to the 6. An image from the video posted on social media created
confusion, because it looked like the balls were frozen, but they were not. It was just a bad camera angle,
where the gap was not visible. Both Sky and Marcel later confirmed there was a very small gap between the
balls, which is why there was no discussion before the shot concerning the balls being frozen, because they
were not!

    After the shot in Image 1, Marcel confidently called a foul immediately. Sky obviously thought the shot was
good, but Marcel is totally confident it was a foul. Many of Sky’s followers obviously thought Sky was wronged
because they think if Sky thought the shot was good, it must have been good. But even top players don’t
always have a full understanding of rule subtleties and pool physics. However, referees are human, and they
sometimes make mistakes. Many examples can be found on the “fouls – bad calls” resource page linked in
the YouTube video description, where I have compiled numerous incorrect calls made by top referees in pro
pool tournaments over the years.

    During the shot replay, commentator Karl Boyes said you need to physically see a double hit to call a foul,
but that is incorrect. There needs to be clear evidence of a foul, for example observed motion of the CB, but

Billiards Digest                                     1                                             November 2024
you don’t actually need to see the tip hit the CB twice. After the replay review by Marcel, which he probably did
only for “appearances” and to quiet Sky’s protest, he stuck to his initial call that the shot was a foul. Again,
watch the shot at the beginning of online video NV L.62 to see if you agree with him or not.

     Well, whether you agree or not, Marcel was most definitely correct. The clear evidence for the foul is the
motion of the CB. With a clean single hit, the CB would head along the tangent line before drawing back, but
Sky’s shot went well forward of the tangent line (see Image 2). Because the gap between the balls is so small,
the tangent line direction is obvious. It is the kiss line off the 6, perpendicular to the direction the 6 heads. With
a small-gap, non-jumping draw shots like this, the CB can go forward of the tangent line only if the CB is hit
more than once or pushed forward after 6-ball contact. As Marcel stated, the CB clearly went forward of the
tangent line before drawing back, so the shot was an obvious foul. In the top-right of Image 1, notice Marcel's
perfect view down the tangent line, which helped him see that the CB clearly went forward well too far.

                   Image 2 Overhead view immediately after the hit during the instant replay

     In online video NV L.62, I recreated the shot to demonstrate both clean and illegal hits. Check out the video
so you can clearly see the difference. Past pool hustler and world-class pro player CJ Wiley (who sometimes
has “interesting” pool and life philosophies, which he often eloquently orates on social media with his smooth
Texas accent) also posted a video in response to the controversy. Unfortunately, he claims in his video that
the shot was not a foul, thus adding to the confusion on social media, since many people apparently worship
him and believe everything he says. The shot CJ demonstrated in his video was in fact not a foul (see Image
3), because the CB did head in the tangent line direction off the 6 before drawing back, but CJ used a much
larger horizontal angle and higher cue elevation, and there was probably a larger gap between the CB and 6
as compared to Sky’s shot. But again, Sky’s shot was clearly a foul since the CB went well forward of the
expected tangent line (see Image 2). Marcel most definitely made the correct call. Good job Marcel!

Billiards Digest                                        2                                               November 2024
                               Image 3 CJ Wiley’s “recreation” of Sky’s shot

     If you were watching recent US Open coverage, I know what you are thinking. If Sky’s shot was a foul, how
come Corey’s similar shot (see Image 4) was called good. If you watch Corey’s shot in online video NV L.62,
the CB obviously went well forward of the tangent line. Well, the major difference is, unlike with Sky’s shot
where there was a small gap between the balls, the CB was frozen to the 4 in Corey’s case. You can see the
balls settle together at the end of his previous shot, and Corey had the ref verify the balls were frozen before
shooting. As clearly explained and demonstrated on the “fouls – frozen CB” resource page linked in the
YouTube video description, you are allowed to hit into a frozen CB at any angle since it results in a clean, single
hit.

Billiards Digest                                      3                                              November 2024
                                       Image 4 Corey Deuel frozen-CB shot

    If you want to learn more about how to both detect and avoid fouls, including double hits, see the “fouls”
and “double hit” resource pages at billiards.colostate.edu. Included are many super-slow-motion clips
showing what both legal single hits and double-hit fouls look like in different situations. Check out the videos
and other info at the links. Seeing stuff in super slow motion really helps understanding.

      Well, I hope you agree that the argument is now settled.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV L.62 – Skyler Woodward Foul at the European Open … The Controversy is Settled
   normal video

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                         4                                              November 2024
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/put_a_bounce_in_your_step.pdf
title: Put A Bounce In Your Step
topics: uncategorized
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
[NO_EXTRACTED_TEXT]
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/rail_cut_shot_cb_control.pdf
title: Rail Cut Shot CB Control
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Rail Cut Shot CB Control”                                                  ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu.
The reference numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     I have written much about cue ball (CB) control over the years, covering applications of the 90º rule for
stun shots, the 30º rule for rolling-CB shots, and the trisect system for good-action draw shots. These three
references are useful for predicting and creating CB directions for a wide range of shots including “tweeners”
with various amounts of top or bottom spin. If you are not familiar with these useful CB control principles and
how to apply them at the table, check out the info, articles, and video demonstrations under “where the CB
goes for different types of shots” on the “cue ball control” resource page in the FAQ section at
billiards.colostate.edu.

     In this article, I show how CB control principles can be applied to cut shots close to a rail. Diagram 1
illustrates how to predict CB direction for a rolling-CB rail cut shot, where the 30º rule applies. The Dr. Dave
peace sign (see the gray hand in the diagram) can be used to visualize the expected natural angle off the
object ball (OB) into the rail. If the rail were not there, the CB would continue to travel in the “30º rule
direction.” Since the CB will rebound off the rail at roughly the same angle at which it approaches (“A”), the
30º natural-angle direction can simply be mirrored to predict the “final CB direction” (see “mirror of angle A”).
This is very easy to visualize at the table and can be very useful in play, especially if you don’t yet have a
good feel for where the CB heads on rail cut shots like this.

                           Diagram 1 Mirrored 30º rule rail-cut mirrored-CB path

     Diagram 2 illustrates how the same mirror approach can be used to visualize the final CB direction for
good-action draw shots into a rail. With good-action draw, the trisect system predicts that the total angle
between the initial and final CB directions is three-times the cut angle of the shot (see the angles labelled “1,”
“2,” and “3”). As before, the “final CB direction” is simply the mirror image of the “trisect system direction.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                     February, 2017
                           Diagram 2 Mirrored trisect system rail-cut CB path

    As with most pool shots, speed is also important. Diagram 3 illustrates the effect of speed on a rolling-
CB shot. Here, the OB is far enough from the rail that the CB will develop full roll and finish curving before
reaching the cushion. The faster a shot is, the longer the CB persists along the 90º tangent-line direction
before curving forward. This effectively shifts the CB path down the tangent line. However, the final natural
angle is still the same for each of the shots in the diagram. The only difference is the sideways shift.

                                Diagram 3 Speed effects far from the rail
Billiards Digest                                                                                 February, 2017
     Diagram 4 shows another important speed effect. When the OB is close to the rail like this, the CB might
not have enough distance to curve forward completely before hitting the cushion. Because of this, some
topspin remains on the CB causing curving to occur after rebound. And because the CB loses some speed
when rebounding off a rail, the topspin on the CB can have a greater effect causing the CB to curve forward
more than it would otherwise. With the slow shot in Diagram 4 (see the black CB path), the CB does most of
its curving before hitting the cushion. Therefore, the CB comes off close to the expected mirrored natural-
angle direction. With the medium-speed shot (see the blue CB path), the CB heads more in the tangent-line
direction into the cushion and initially comes off at a steeper angle, but the forward spin causes more curve
than might be expected. This is evident in the difference in final CB directions shown by the extended gray
lines in the diagram. This effect is even more exaggerated with the “fast” shot (see the red CB path).

                                  Diagram 4 Speed effects close to the rail

    It is important to point out that with shots like these, the CB path can also be affected by how much you
actually cut the OB and by how much sidespin gets transferred to the CB from the hit (called cut-induced
spin). If you hit the OB thinner or fuller than you expect (but still pocket the ball by “cheating the pocket”), the
resulting CB path will be different due to slight changes in CB speed and direction off the OB. And cut-
induced spin, which depends on ball conditions, will also change the rebound angle off the cushion. In other
words, don’t always expect the CB path to be exactly along your predicted line. However, your predictions
should be close if you correctly visualize the mirrored direction and take speed effects into account.

     I hope the info in this article helps you control “whitey” even better than before, especially when coming
off a rail.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       February, 2017
Dr. Dave is author of The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards book and DVD, and co-author of
the Video Encyclopedias of Pool Shots (VEPS), Pool Practice (VEPP), and Eight Ball (VEEB), and
the How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS) and Billiard University (BU) instructional DVD series, all
available at: DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                         February, 2017
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/return_of_the_squirt_robot.pdf
title: Return of the Squirt Robot
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills, robotics_and_computation
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                                ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Return of the Squirt Robot”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips,
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. See the website for details.

    This is a follow-up to my February ’08 article, where I presented experimental results from a
squirt-testing robot some mechanical engineering students and I designed and built last year at
Colorado State University. In my February article, I showed results for how squirt is relatively
constant for all speeds, how a laminated shaft can be very radially consistent at different cue twist
angles (i.e., the squirt is relatively constant for all laminate orientations), and how squirt varies
when mass is added at different distances from the tip. In this article, I present results of some
additional tests we did recently for hard and soft tips and stiffness variations.

      My August ’06 through April ’08 articles cover squirt, swerve, and throw in detail, but here’s a
quick review: squirt, also called cue ball (CB) deflection, refers to the angular change in the
initial CB direction due to an off-center hit. In other words, when you use English, the CB doesn’t
go where you are aiming because of squirt (see NV 4.13 and NV A.17). When using English, it is
also important to be aware of the effects of swerve (see NV 4.14 and NV 7.12) and throw (see
NV 4.15, NV 4.16, NV A.21). Sometimes, the phrase “effective squirt” or the term “squerve” is
used to refer to the net effect of both squirt and swerve on the shift in the CB position at object
ball (OB) impact (see my August ’07 article for more information). A concise summary of all
important squirt, swerve, and throw effects can be found in the FAQ section of my website under
“aiming” (see “aim compensation for squirt, swerve, and throw”).

    As described in my February ’08 article, our squirt robot was designed to measure only squirt.
In other words, swerve and throw, which vary with speed and ball and cloth conditions, have no
effect on our results. When playing pool, swerve and throw do come into play because the cue is
always elevated some to provide clearance, either for your grip hand or over the rails (see my
March ’08 article for more info). If you want to refer back to any of my past articles, they are all
available on my website (billiards.colostate.edu).
                     NV 4.13 – Squirt due to high speed English
                     NV 4.14 – English curve due to an elevated cue
                     NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
                     NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video         NV 7.12 – Small-curve massé shot
                     NV A.17 – Effective squirt vs. speed
                     NV A.21 – Bank shot using throw and spin transfer

     Diagram 1 shows the results of a classic experiment to show how end-mass affects a cue’s
squirt. In the experiment, a mass is added to the cue at different positions. When the added
mass is close to the tip, the effect on the squirt is the largest; and when the added mass is more
than a certain distance from the tip, the added mass has no effect on the amount of squirt.
Diagram 1 shows the results for two identical Action cues, one with a soft tip and one with a hard
tip. The tests were done with two different added masses: 8 grams (0.28 ounces) and 34 grams
(1.23 ounces). The four curves show the following trends:

               1. More added mass creates more squirt.

Billiards Digest                                                                          August, 2008
          2. The closer the added mass is to the tip, the more squirt you get.

          3. When mass is added beyond 6-8 inches, it has no effect on squirt. The curves don’t
             show data beyond 8 inches, but we did test this.

          4. A soft tip seems to create slightly more squirt than a hard tip.

       Diagram 1 Squirt vs. added endmass amount and distance for soft and hard tips

     Items 1 through 3 above are the same results seen in previous experiments reported in my
February ’08 article. Item 4 is the new result here. It makes sense because a soft tip has a
slightly longer contact time than a hard tip (we used a high-speed camera to measure contact
times of a little more than 2/3000 of a second for the soft tip and a little less than 2/3000 of a
second for the hard tip). A slightly longer contact time results in slightly more effective endmass
(see TP A.31 for more info). This results in slightly more squirt, which also results in slightly less
English for the same tip offset (see Diagram 3 in my December ’07 article). If you are curious,
you can read a lot more about tip hardness and its effects from me and others under “cue tip” in
the FAQ section of my website. I should mention one more thing about item 4. I included the
phrase “seems to” because I didn’t use the exact same shaft for each set of tests. The two shafts
(one with the hard tip and one with the soft tip) were the same model and from the same batch,
but there could be differences. A better test would be to replace the soft tip on one shaft with an
identical weight hard tip and repeat the same tests with the exact same shaft ... maybe next time.
For example, it is possible (but not likely, IMO) the difference between the soft and hard tip
results above are just due to tip weight or shaft density differences. Isn’t science hard?

Billiards Digest                                                                          August, 2008
                   TP A.31 – The physics of squirt
technical proof

      The results of the added-mass experiment explain why manufacturers have been able to
create “low-squirt” cues by using a smaller diameter shaft, drilling out the end of the shaft, and/or
using a lighter ferrule. All of these modifications reduce the end-mass of the cue (see my
December ’07 article for more information). If you want to see an exaggerated example of the
effect of end-mass on squirt, see NV B.1. At the 6:00 point in the video, Mike Page uses a pair of
metal vise grips to add significant mass and squirt to a cue. The effect is dramatic ... check it out
... the CB squirts more than two feet over the length of the table! I don’t recommend using vise
grips at home, because you might damage your cue, but if you have some clothespins lying
around, give them a try (see NV B.32). Clothespins won’t add as much mass as a vise grip, but
the effect is still quite noticeable ... and your shaft won’t get damaged. Give it a try.

                   NV B.1 – Mike Page's squirt and swerve video
normal video
                   NV B.32 – Squirt and the effects of endmass

    In my February ’08 article, I presented results for how squirt varied (or didn’t vary) with cue
twist angle for a Meucci Black Dot laminated cue. At different twist angles, the wood layers are
oriented at different angles relative to the table, and one might expect the shaft to have different
properties (e.g., stiffness) at different twist angles (i.e., cue orientations), but the squirt angles
were very consistent (i.e., the shaft had good “radial consistency”). The radial consistency might
be related to the fact that the wood laminates are glued together. The glue might help make the
density and stiffness more uniform throughout the shaft, but I’m not sure.

    Diagram 2 shows experimental data for squirt measurements taken for an inexpensive
Action cue (the same cue used for the soft-tip tests in Diagram 1). Twist angle refers to how
much the shaft is rotated, before the shot, to change the grain orientation (see the end view of the
shaft in the diagram figure). One might expect the “end-mass” to vary slightly with cue twist angle
due to slight density and stiffness variations due to grain orientation (see TP A.31); but,
apparently, the effect is not very significant, at least with the cues we tested (e.g., the inexpensive
Action cue made from a single piece of wood).

Billiards Digest                                                                           August, 2008
                   Diagram 2 Radial consistency for an inexpensive Action cue

     Diagram 3 shows results for what I call the “Beaver Cue” experiment. We took a Meucci
Red-Dot cue (made from a single piece of wood, not laminated like the Black-Dot tested for my
February ’08 article) and cut away wood from both sides of the shaft, leaving a narrow section of
wood, as illustrated in the inset figure in Diagram 3. The goal was to test the effects of shaft-end
stiffness on endmass and squirt. One would expect the 0º orientation of the cue, where the
narrow section of the cut is vertical, to be the least stiff, and the 90º orientation, where the section
is horizontal, to be the most stiff. The data does show radial inconsistency (the squirt is about
20% smaller at 90º and about 20% larger at 180º), but I think many people would have expected
to see a much larger variation in squirt with the beaver cue. Squirt does change with cue twist
angle for this grossly malformed, asymmetric cue, but it doesn’t seem to change much with
unmodified cues (for the ones we have tested to date, anyway). This makes sense because the
mass of the end of the shaft doesn’t change with orientation. However, the effective endmass
does depend on the stiffness of the end of the shaft (see TP A.31), and stiffness can vary with
cue orientation. Stiffness variation is what I think explains the trend in Diagram 3.

Billiards Digest                                                                            August, 2008
                    Diagram 3 “Beaver Cue” radial consistency experiment

    Before doing the “beaver cue” experiment, I thought the largest squirt would occur at 90º (and
270º), where the narrow section of the cut provides the greatest sideways stiffness, but this
wasn’t the case. Maybe the wood grain orientation has something to do with it. As illustrated
with the grain orientation lines in the Diagram 3 figure, the grain in the shaft we tested had about
a 30º twist over the first foot of the shaft. Unfortunately, one thing we failed to do was test the
shaft before we made the cuts. I know this sounds ridiculous and incredibly stupid ... I guess our
“beavers” were a little too eager. I’ll try to repeat the experiment in the future with other cues,
being more careful to run the tests both before and after removing material.

     Mike Page has also done some “beaver cue” experiments where he made big cuts closer to
the joint of the cue. He removed a large amount of mass, but because it was well outside of the
endmass zone, it had no affect on squirt at all. The experiment also showed how overall cue
stiffness (the cue was very whippy after the cuts) has no effect on squirt.

    I hope you have learned from the data provided by our squirt-testing robot. Next year, we
plan to build a better machine and perform many more studies for a larger collection of cues. So
expect more “Return of the Squirt Machine” articles in the future.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS: I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, cling, stun,
tangent line, 30º rule, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you

Billiards Digest                                                                            August, 2008
ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online glossary
in the “Instructor and Student Resources” section of my website.

PS: I just released a new DVD called “High-speed Video Magic.” It features billiards, but it also
includes stupid human and animal tricks, balloons popping and bouncing, things breaking,
engineering stuff, toy physics, and fluids and foods in super slow motion. For more information
and video excerpts, see the website (billiards.colostate.edu).

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                        August, 2008
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/robotic_billiards_understanding_humans_in_order_to_counter_them.pdf
title: Robotic Billiards: Understanding Humans in Order to Counter Them
topics: strategy_rules_drills, robotics_and_computation
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS                                                                                                                              1

                Robotic Billiards: Understanding Humans
                       in Order to Counter Them
                             Thomas Nierhoff, Konrad Leibrandt, Tamara Lorenz, and Sandra Hirche

   Abstract—Ongoing technological advances in the areas of com-                     care to training/education. Interaction between humans and
putation, sensing, and mechatronics enable robotic-based systems                    robots can be of different type, for example on a physical
to interact with humans in the real world. To succeed against                       basis [1]–[3], using gestures, or social interaction [4]–[6].
a human in a competitive scenario, a robot must anticipate the
human behavior and include it in its own planning framework.                        The same accounts for the level of interaction [7], rang-
Then it can predict the next human move and counter it accord-                      ing from reactive control strategies [8], [9] to learning-based
ingly, thus not only achieving overall better performance but                       agents [10], enabling them to predict future actions of the
also systematically exploiting the opponent’s weak spots. Pool is                   interaction partner and to act accordingly. On an even higher
used as a representative scenario to derive a model-based plan-                     level one is interested in the intention of a participating sub-
ning and control framework where not only the physics of the
environment but also a model of the opponent is considered. By                      ject, going beyond the set of observable action toward figuring
representing the game of pool as a Markov decision process and                      out the underlying action goals [11], either in collaborative
incorporating a model of the human decision-making based on                         scenarios [12]–[14] or in competitive scenarios [15], [16].
studies, an optimized policy is derived. This enables the robot to                     Competitive games are an appealing test scenario for
include the opponent’s typical game style into its tactical con-                    human–robot interaction for various reasons. On the one hand,
siderations when planning a stroke. The results are validated in
simulations and real-life experiments with an anthropomorphic                       most people encounter them on a daily basis whenever doing
robot playing pool against a human.                                                 some kind of competitive sports. On the other hand, they pro-
                                                                                    vide an ideal test bed [17]–[20] as game rules are well defined
  Index Terms—Cognitive robotics, decision making, dynamic
programming, human-robot interaction, intelligent robots, max-                      and evaluation is easy—if you win, you are better than your
imum likelihood estimation.                                                         opponent. Due to its multifaceted aspects combining motor
                                                                                    performance and planning capabilities, billiards (pool) is used
                                                                                    as a representative scenario in this paper.
                           I. I NTRODUCTION                                            For mastering a competitive game its entity, different fac-
      S ROBOTIC technologies advance, robots are no longer
A     only suitable for automated processes with predefined
motion sequences but may accomplish tasks in dynami-
                                                                                    tors must be taken into account to master a competitive
                                                                                    game. When facing a human opponent, being aware of his
                                                                                    individual preferences and limitations can help to improve
cally changing environments and even in the interaction with                        oneself’s game play. Once the weak spots of an opponent are
humans. Seamless human–robot interaction is one of the most                         known, they can be countered to gain a tactical advantage.
challenging topics in current robotic research with a tremen-                       At the same time, a player must be aware of his own flaws
dous application potential ranging from manufacturing via                           to consider them properly when planning ahead. All exist-
                                                                                    ing pool planners, e.g., PoolFiz [21], rely on a model-based
   Manuscript received May 18, 2015; accepted June 15, 2015. This work              approach and use a pool simulator based on the underlying
was supported in part by the European Research Council Starting Grant
“Control Based on Human Models (con-humo)” under Grant 337654, and                  pool physics [22]–[25]. To evaluate their performance in a
in part by the Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst (german academic              competitive setup, the international computer games associ-
exchange service) (www.daad.de). This paper was recommended by Associate            ation computational pool tournament was hold three times so
Editor H. Qiao.
   T. Nierhoff is with the Chair of Information-Oriented Control (ITR), Faculty     far in 2005, 2006, and 2008. Most of the participating plan-
of Electrical Engineering, Technische Universität München, Munich D-80333,          ners densely sample the most likely strokes, thus creating a
Germany, and also with the Department of Mechano-Informatics, University            search tree with a large branching factor in order to predict
of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan (e-mail: tn@tum.de).
   K. Leibrandt is with the Hamlyn Centre for Robotic Surgery,                      the outcome of every stroke [26], [27]. A different method is
Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, U.K. (e-mail:                              presented in [28] and [29] where a gradient-based optimiza-
k.leibrandt12@imperial.ac.uk).                                                      tion is used to pocket balls and to take position play into
   T. Lorenz is with the Chair of Information-Oriented Control (ITR),
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Technische Universität München, Munich           account. Besides, there exist various planners based on fuzzy
D-80333, Germany, and also with the Experimental Psychology Unit,                   logic [30], [31] and deeper theoretical considerations about
Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, Munich 80539, Germany (e-mail:                the existence of Nash equilibria at pool [32]. Yet all those
tlorenz@tum.de).
   S. Hirche is with the Chair of Information-Oriented Control (ITR), Faculty       planners assume that both players act according to the same
of Electrical Engineering, Technische Universität München, Munich D-80333,          underlying optimality principles and do not account for indi-
Germany (e-mail: hirche@tum.de).                                                    vidual preferences which can occur when facing a human with
   Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.                                               a pool robot [33]–[36]. In combination with the specific hard-
   Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCYB.2015.2457404                              ware limitations of robotic systems, the question thus becomes
                       2168-2267 c 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
                            See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
          This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

2                                                                                                                         IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS

whether a robot is capable of overcoming its physical draw-                        knowledge is necessary as the optimal stroke of the robot A0,r
backs through extensive planning and proper incorporation of                       also depends on the strokes of the human according to (1).
the opponents preferences.                                                         Hence, studies must be conducted to derive an approximate
   The contribution of this paper is the consideration of the                      model of the human decision-making to evaluate (1) precisely.
human decision model to improve the success rate of a robotic                      The second aspect, a limited motor skill of robot and human,
system at a competitive game. The presented approach based                         refers to the deviation between the planned stroke A∗{r,h} and
on a Markov decision process (MDP) is able to take both                            the executed stroke A{r,h} . Caused by limits in perception,
hardware limitations and a detailed model of the human                             uncertainties in motor control, and imperfect internal models
decision-making process into account. Thus the robot can pre-                      of both players, the executed stroke is in general not similar
dict the human’s actions and adapt to them by deriving an                          to the planned stroke. This turns the deterministic game in
optimized policy. Due to the competitive nature of the game,                       simulation into a probabilistic game in real-world situations.
the approach resembles a expectiminimax tree. Experiments                          When representing both factors well enough with a probability
are both simulation-based with thousands of games evaluated                        distribution fn , it is modeled as follows:
and hardware-based using a real-anthropomorphic robot play-                                                                   
                                                                                                            A{r,h} = fn A∗{r,h} .              (2)
ing pool against a human. They show how the robot is able to
improve its success rate significantly by planning ahead while                     The last aspect, robot kinematic constraints, limits the space
incorporating the human model. To the best of our knowledge,                       of actions Ar of the robot as follows:
this is the first paper explicitly improving the robot’s game
                                                                                                                      Ar ⊂ A.                                (3)
play at pool by considering a human-specific decision-making
model.                                                                             As the human kinematic constraints are negligible, it is
   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.                            assumed that Ah = A.
Section II presents both a detailed problem description and                           All three aspects must be quantified and represented by pre-
the general planning framework. In Sections III and IV, it is                      cise models for incorporating them in (1). Focusing in this
described how hardware limitations and the human model are                         paper on the human behavior, it is investigated how well the
included in the planner. Experimental results are presented in                     human decision-making can be modeled and to what extent a
Section VI. Finally, Section VII concludes with a summary                          good model improves the win rate of the robot.
and possible expansions for the future.
                                                                                   B. General Framework
    II. P ROBLEM S TATEMENT AND C ONCEPTUAL A PPROACH                                 This section develops a mathematical framework using an
                                                                                   MDP to model the game of pool in its entity and consider all
A. Problem Statement
                                                                                   aspects listed in Section II-A. Pool can be represented as a
   Following the definition in [37], “eight-ball” billiards (from                  sequential stochastic game with a continuous action space and
now on called “pool”) can be seen as an competitive inter-                         a continuous state space. It is sequential due to the turn-based
action scenario where a robot faces a human in a turn-based                        stroke execution switching between both players and stochas-
manner. In order to win the game, every player has to pocket                       tic due to the nondeterministic outcome of every stroke caused
all balls of his own color and finally the black ball before the                   by the limited skill of each player. Differing from games with
other player. At each turn, the player in charge can pocket balls                  a finite set of states such as chess or backgammon, there
by executing a stroke with the cue. A model-based approach                         is an infinite number of possible combinations for the balls
is pursued in this paper to select an optimal stroke by pre-                       to be placed on the table. The same holds for the actions.
dicting the outcome of the next few turns. If it is the robot’s                    When discretizing the state and action space, the game of
turn, the challenge is to find an optimized stroke (action) Ar                     pool is modeled as a MAXPROB MDP (MAXPROB MDP)
from the action set Ar also incorporating the pool state S ∈ S                     (see [38]). It is based upon a standard MDP defined by tuples
and possible actions Ah ∈ Ah of the human. Using the depth                         of the form S, A, T , R, G, s0  where S ∈ S is the set of states
variable t accounting for the number of actions to plan ahead,                     (position of all balls on the table plus current game situation
the problem is reformulated as follows:                                            determined by the rules), A ∈ A is the set of actions (strokes),
                                                                                 T ∈ T is a transition function S × A × S → [0; 1] denoting
         A0,r = argmax Q St , At,{r,h} , t = 0, 1, . . . , n   (1)
                     At,r                                                          the probability of moving from state Si to Sj by executing the
                                                                                   action A, R ∈ R is a mapping S × A →R specifying action
with the yet unknown cost function Q encoding the quality of                       rewards, and S0 is the start state.
the next n actions. Through proper choice of Q, maximizing                            For an MDP, the general goal is to find an optimal policy
the term in (1) results in an optimal tactic to win the game.                      π ∗ maximizing the expected reward when traversing the states
Note that we only optimize over At,r , i.e., the actual and future                 of the MDP. By introducing the discount factor γ ∈ [0; 1]
action of the robot, because the strokes At,h of the human                         and the value function V : S → R, the value function V π (s)
cannot be directly influenced.                                                     denoting the expected reward for the policy π starting in state
   Differing from simulations, the robot must consider three                       S is defined as follows:
important aspects in real life. The first aspect, an unknown                                                  ∞                  
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                   π        π
human decision-making, makes it difficult to predict the exe-                                    V (S) = E          γ R(St , At )
                                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                                                      .           (4)
cuted human stroke At,h for a given situation St . Yet this                                                             t=0                   S0 =S
         This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

NIERHOFF et al.: ROBOTIC BILLIARDS: UNDERSTANDING HUMANS IN ORDER TO COUNTER THEM                                                                           3

In addition, the action-value function Q : S × A → R in (1)
is formalized as follows:
                         ∞                    
                           
         Qπ (S, A) = Eπ        γ t R(St , At )    .     (5)
                        t=0              S0 =S,A0 =A
                    ∗
The optimal policy π is the policy that maximizes the value
function V π for all possible policies π as follows:                                            (a)                                         (b)
                             ∗                 π
                          π = argmax V                                     (6)    Fig. 1.   Stroke parameter overview. (a) All possible stroke parameters.
                                         π
                                                                                  (b) Considered stroke parameters in this paper.
resulting in the optimal value function V ∗ (S) and action-value
function Q∗ (S, A). Both value function and action-value func-
tion are closely related, as such the optimal value function
V ∗ (S) is obtained by finding the action A that maximizes the                         III. M ODELING H UMAN /ROBOT M OTOR S KILL AND
optimal action-value function Q∗ (S, A) as follows:                                            ROBOT K INEMATIC C ONSTRAINTS
                                                                                     As explained in Section II-A, the limited motor skills of
                      V ∗ (S) = max Q∗ (S, A).                             (7)    both players let the executed stroke differ from the desired
                                     A
Note that the used formulation is consistent with the existing                    or planned stroke, thus requiring a measure to describe the
literature on the topic (see [39]).                                               percentage of success of a desired stroke. This is described by
    MAXPROB MDPs are a special class of MDPs with the                             the pocket probability which incorporates the limited motor
goal of maximizing the probability of reaching a goal state;                      skill in the presented planning framework. As it is based upon
that is the probability of winning a game. They are based upon                    the stroke difficulty measure, the latter is introduced first.
stochastic shortest path MDP (SSP MDP) introducing a set
of absorbing goal states G ∈ G. Such a goal state is defined
by T (G, A, G) = 1, ∀A ∈ A             and R(G, A) = 0, ∀A ∈ A,                   A. Measure of Stroke Difficulty
allowing only self-transitions in G and accumulating no                              The expected reward in (4) is closely related to the stroke
reward. The only two conditions for SSP MDPs are that for                         difficulty. When playing pool, the expected reward depends on
every state S at least one proper policy exists that reaches                      the number of pocketed balls. Intuitively the more difficult it
a goal state with probability P = 1. Additionally, every                          is to pocket a ball, the lower the reward is. When executing
improper policy has a reward of −∞. For pool, SSP MDPs                            a stroke, the player must not hit the ball he wants to pocket
are still not applicable as they only feature goal states (robot                  (called “object ball”) directly. Instead, he has to hit the white
wins) but no dead end states (human wins). In case of dead                        ball (called “cue ball”) with the cue. From a mathematical
end states, it is not guaranteed anymore that a goal state                        perspective, a stroke can be described by five parameters α,
can be reached from any other state with probability P = 1.                       β, γ , θ , and p [43] for a given 2-D cue ball position on a flat
MAXPROB MDPs on the other hand have a similar structure                           table Fig. 1. Stroke intensity p and stroke angle θ have to be
as SSP MDPs but explicitly account for dead ends by judging                       considered even by novice players in order to pocket balls. On
the quality of every policy not based on the expected reward                      the other hand, the angles α, β, and σ are mainly varied by
but based on the probability of eventually reaching a goal                        advanced players to induce spin on the cue ball for a better
state. By assigning a reward R = 1 to every action that reaches                   position play. A central assumption for the remainder of this
a goal state and R = 0 to all other actions, the resulting opti-                  paper is a well defined spin during the stroke. As such the
mal value function V ∗ (S) reflects the probability of reaching                   cue ball is supposed to be hit centrally and with no side spin
a goal state (e.g., winning the game) when starting in state S.                   (e.g., α = 0, β = 0, and σ = π/2). As a result, the parameter
    In theory, an optimal policy can be obtained then for an arbi-                space can be reduced from 5-D to 2-D (θ and p).
trary start state S0 using heuristic search algorithms [40], [41].                   Different measures are used in this paper to define the
Unfortunately, due to the large state space, those algorithms                     stroke difficulty. For direct shots where the cue ball hits the
cannot be used for pool. Instead one has to use approxi-                          object ball without any other ball–ball or ball–cushion col-
mation algorithms resulting in a near-optimal value function                      lisions, the stroke difficulty can be calculated using basic
            ∗
V̂ π ≤ V π by evaluating only the most promising subset of                        geometry. Assuming a negligible spin transfer during ball–
state-action pairs. In general, those algorithms turn the prob-                   ball collisions, the stroke intensity p and stroke angle θ being
abilistic MDP into a deterministic planning problem resulting                     independent of each other, and the stroke intensity p being
in a search tree with S0 being the root and solve it using a                      large enough to pocket a ball, the difficulty of a direct shot
deterministic planner [42].                                                       is solely specified by the range of values [θl ; θu ] (see [44]).
    Having obtained a policy, an individual action-value func-                    The value θm = 0.5(θl + θu ) denotes the mean angle for
tion can be assigned to each stroke specifying the expected                       which the object ball is pocketed in the middle of the pocket.
reward. Then a player simply has to execute the stroke with                       Intuitively, the smaller the interval [θl ; θu ] or allowed angular
the highest expected reward. A method to find an action-                          deviation (AAD) becomes the more difficult the stroke will
value function that also considers the human motor skill and                      be [see Fig. 2(a)]. The same technique can also be used for
decision-making is developed in the following sections.                           combination shots including more than one object ball.
          This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

4                                                                                                                            IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS

                (a)                                        (b)                     Fig. 3. Kinematic constraints of the robotic system. Due to collisions with
                                                                                   the pool table, the robot cannot execute a stroke in an arbitrary direction for
Fig. 2. Visualization of two methods to determine the difficulty of a stroke.      a given ball position. The brighter the area is, the larger the range of possible
(a) AAD stroke difficulty based upon the maximal angular deviation for which       stroke directions is. Gray-circled segments mark the possible stroke direction
the object ball is just pocketed. (b) Expert stroke difficulty based upon the      for certain positions of the white ball.
distance d1 between cue and object balls, the distance d2 between object ball
and hole and cutting angle θc .

                                                                                   B. Measure of Pocket Probability
   Another method to determine the stroke difficulty is based                         This section derives the pocket probability Ps ∈ [0; 1]. It
upon expert knowledge [45], [46]. It reveals that the human                        links the stroke difficulty presented in Section III-A to the indi-
perception of stroke difficulty depends only on a few param-                       vidual motor skill of each player as described mathematically
eters: the distance d1 between cue ball and object ball, the                       in (2).
distance d2 between object ball and pocket, and the cutting                           It is assumed that the stroke precision of robot and
angle θc [see Fig. 2(b)]. Various approaches in this paper try                     human is represented by normal distributions for the stroke
to determine an expression for the difficulty of a stroke based                    intensity p and stroke angle θ as Np,{r,h} (μp , σp,{r,h}
                                                                                                                                          2    ) and
on this knowledge [26], [30], one of the most prominent ones                       Nθ,{r,h} (μθ , σθ,{r,h} ). Here, μp and μθ encode the desired
                                                                                                   2

is [28]                                                                            (planned) stroke A∗ . The variances σp,{r,h}
                                                                                                                             2      and σθ,{r,h}
                                                                                                                                           2      rep-
                                                                                   resent the individual skill level of robot and human. Novice
                                     cos(θc )                                      players are characterized by large variances whereas for pro-
                              κ=              .                             (8)
                                      d1 d2                                        fessionals the variance is close to zero. Equation (2) is thus
                                                                                   reformulated using the 2-D normal distribution N{r,h} as
Analogously to the AAD stroke difficulty, a small value corre-                     follows:
sponds to a tricky stroke and a large value represents an easy                                                   
one. The AAD stroke difficulty can be linked in a straightfor-                                            A = fn A∗ = N{r,h} (μ, )                             (9)
ward fashion to the pocket probability, implicitly considering
the parameters θc , d1 , d2 , and partially blocked paths due to                   with μ = [μp , μθ ]T ,  = diag(σp,{r,h}
                                                                                                                          2    , σθ,{r,h}
                                                                                                                                  2       ).
other balls on the table. The expert stroke difficulty on the                         The limited motor skill of human and robot is encoded
other hand suggests that the human perception of difficulty                        by the variances σp,{r,h}
                                                                                                           2    , σθ,{r,h}
                                                                                                                   2        (see [44]). When defining
deviates from the AAD stroke difficulty due to a different                         the stroke difficulty using the AAD method, the stroke dif-
perspective, thus requiring a new difficulty measure when                          ficulty can be converted for every stroke into a pocket
modeling the human decision-making.                                                probability Ps ∈ [0; 1]. Similar to the stroke angle, we assume
   Robot kinematic constraints can be incorporated using the                       that a ball will be pocketed for stroke intensities within the
AAD stroke difficulty. It is assumed that robot kinematic con-                     interval [pl ; pu ]. For stroke intensities p < pl , the ball is not
straints limit the range of admissible θ -values to the interval                   fast enough to be pocketed and values p > pu cannot be
[θlk ; θuk ]. Then the resulting interval of stroke angles that are                achieved due to a limited player strength. With f{r,h} as the
both executable by the robot and pocket a ball is given by                         probability density function of N{r,h} , the pocket probability
the intersection [θl ; θu ] ∩ [θlk ; θuk ]. Fig. 3 illustrates the influ-          can be described by
ence of the robot kinematic constraints. Shown is a simplified,
                                                                                                                       pu θu
yet true-to-scale collision model of the used pool robot and
the pool table, approximated by bounding boxes. The robot                                                     Ps =             f{r,h} dθ dp.                  (10)
is limited by two constraints. First, it has a stiff body (dark                                                      pl θl
gray rectangle in Fig. 3) which collides with the table if the
white ball is placed too far away from any cushion. Second, its                    We further assume that σp       pu − pl , pl   μp      pu , i.e.,
right endeffector does not lie on the table but on the cushion,                    the pocket probability is mostly unaffected by the choice of
which causes problems if the white ball is placed too close to                     μp and depends primarily on the stroke angle θ . Then (10) is
the cushion. The angle θr specifies the range of possible stroke                   approximated with fθ,{r,h} as the probability density function
angles for a given position of the white ball on the table. An                     of Nθ,{r,h} by
angle θr = 2π means the white ball can be shot in any direc-
                                                                                                                         θu
tion whereas an angle θr = 0 stands for an unreachable white
ball. Moreover, do gray circles mark the intervals [θlk ; θuk ] of                                              Ps ≈          fθ,{r,h} dθ.                    (11)
stroke angles for specific positions of the white ball.                                                                 θl
         This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

NIERHOFF et al.: ROBOTIC BILLIARDS: UNDERSTANDING HUMANS IN ORDER TO COUNTER THEM                                                                              5

                                                                                                                     TABLE I
The formulas also hold for combination shots but must be                                               I NFLUENCE OF D IFFERENT FACTORS ON
extended if two or more object balls shall be pocketed with a                                              THE H UMAN S TROKE D IFFICULTY
single stroke.

        IV. M ODELING H UMAN D ECISION -M AKING
   This section focuses on the human decision-making to
include it in the general planning framework. Differing from
a robot for which the assumptions in Section III hold and
where the pocket probability can be calculated based upon
the AAD stroke difficulty, the expert stroke difficulty indi-
cates that humans select their stroke based on different criteria.
When modeling human decision-making, three subproblems
are identified.
   1) Compute the Human Stroke Difficulty κh : How difficult
       a human thinks it is to pocket a ball.                                     In 60%, the easier stroke is selected even if it is partially
   2) Compute the Human Pocket Probability Ph : How diffi-                        blocked by another ball. Similar to the answers regarding the
       cult it is for a human to pocket a ball.                                   advantage of a cushion nearby, some people state that the ball
   3) Compute the Human Discount Factor γh : How far a                            helps at aiming; however, other people feel distracted by it.
       human is planning ahead.                                                      For the second experiment, 12 images are created show-
Differing from a rationally acting robot who will pocket the                      ing pool scenarios of different AAD stroke difficulty with
ball with the highest action-value function, unknown human                        one cue ball and one object ball. To compare every possi-
likings or limitations may favor a different stroke. As it is also                ble pair of images, six sets of six images were shown to
unknown how these preferences affect the pocket probability,                      23 participants (13 males, 18–51 years, Ø25 years). The partic-
one has to specify not only the human stroke difficulty κh but                    ipants had to arrange every individual set of images according
also the human pocket probability Ph (κh ) as a function of the                   to their perceived difficulty. Using these sequences, both a rel-
human stroke difficulty (see [47]).                                               ative ranking αk , α, k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 12} and an absolute ranking
   1) Human Stroke Difficulty: In this section, an algebraic                      βk , k ∈ 1, 2, . . . , 12, β ∈ [1, 12] based on the mean ranking
expression of the human stroke difficulty κh based on two                         are obtained for every single scenario.
psychological experiments is derived. Similar to the stroke                          In order to map the result of both experiments to a human
difficulty in Section III-A, it measures the perceived human                      stroke difficulty, five representative measures describing the
difficulty of each stroke and allows to rank them accord-                         human stroke difficulty κh are considered. The first two mea-
ingly. In the first experiment, the most influential factors on                   sures are based upon additive linear models to account for the
the human stroke difficulty are figured out. The result is then                   increasing stroke complexity for high values of d1 , d2 , and θc .
used in combination with the second experiment to determine                       The next two models include the term cos(θc ) to account for
a precise model of the human stroke difficulty.                                   the increasing difficulty at high cutting angles. The last term
   For the first experiment, 25 participants (15 males,                           is an extension of the existing measure (8). They are
21–31 years, Ø25 years) are shown 24 pool scenarios on a                                               c (d1 )         c (d2 )
                                                                                          κ1 = a1 d11            + a2 d22        + a3 θcc3 (θc )
real-pool table representing a wide variety of possible strokes
and AAD values. In every scenario, two playable object balls                              κ2 = a1 d1c1 (d1 ) + a2 d2c2 (d2 ) + a3 θcc3 (θc ) + κp
                                                                                                       c (d1 )         c (d2 )
are placed on the table. For 18 scenarios, the AAD stroke dif-                            κ3 = a1 d11            + a2 d22        + a3 cos(θc )c3 (θc )
ficulty is similar for the two object balls whereas the three
parameters d1 , d2 , and θc are varied. For the other six scenar-                         κ4 = a1 d1c1 (d1 ) + a2 d2c2 (d2 ) + a3 cos(θc )c3 (θc ) + κp
ios, one of the two object balls is easier to pocket according                                    cos(θc )c3 (θc )
                                                                                          κ5 =     c (d1 ) c2 (d2 )
                                                                                                                                                            (12)
to the AAD stroke difficulty, but either more difficult to reach                                 d11      d2
(the player has to lean more over the pool table) or partially
blocked by a third ball, reducing the interval of admissible                      with a = [a1 , a2 , a3 ] as constant coefficients and
stroke angles [θl ; θu ]. Each participant has to judge which ball                c = [c1 , c2 , c3 ] with c1 and c2 as constant coefficients and
seems easier to pocket and is asked to specify freely one or                      c3 as polynomial of degree one. A two-staged optimization is
more reasons for this decision which are categorized after-                       used to find optimized values for a and c. The cost function
wards. The most frequently stated reasons with their number                         1 of the first stage consists of two terms related to the first
of occurrence for the first 18 scenarios are shown in Table I.                    and second psychological experiments. Minimizing the first
The answers show that the variables d1 , d2 , and θc are the                      term corresponds to matching the predicted decision ˆ j (a, c)
most influential factors. The effect of a cushion close to cue                    to the dominant decision j of participants in the first exper-
ball or object ball is indefinite as it helps some players at                     iments. The factor δj acts as a penalty term if the predicted
aiming whereas others feel disturbed. For the six remaining                       decision does not match the decision from the first experiment.
scenarios, in 70% the easier stroke according to the AAD                          By minimizing the second term, one matches the predicted rel-
stroke difficulty is selected even if it is more tricky to reach.                 ative ranking α̂k (a, c) to the relative rank αk of each scenario
            This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

6                                                                                                                           IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS

                                  TABLE II                                                                           TABLE III
                O PTIMIZED PARAMETERS W HEN A PPROXIMATING                                          C ORRELATION C OEFFICIENT B ETWEEN S TROKE
                        THE H UMAN S TROKE D IFFICULTY                                                  D IFFICULTY AND P OCKET P ROBABILITY
                                                                                                          W HEN C ONSIDERING A LL S TROKES

in the second experiment                                                                                             TABLE IV
                                                                                                   C ORRELATION C OEFFICIENTS B ETWEEN S TROKE
          
          18                  
                              12
                                                        2
                                                                                                    D IFFICULTY AND P OCKET P ROBABILITY W HEN
    1 =         δj (a, c) +         α̂k (a, c) − αk
                       2                                                                                  N EGLECTING V ERY E ASY S TROKES
          j=1                 k=1

                                              2     if ˆ j (a, c) =   j
                           where δj =                                       (13)
                                              0     else.
The cost function 2 of the second stage is a measure how
much the predicted absolute ranking κ̂k (a, c) of each scenario
in the second experiment differs from the absolute ranking βk .
To suppress outliers, the 25% trimmed mean βk,25 is used
instead of βk . By minimizing the function 2 , a measure of
the resulting stroke difficulty is obtained
                              
                              12
                                                            2
                        2 =           κ̂k (a, c) − βk,25 .                  (14)
                               k=1
Final results are displayed in Table II. Because the function
κ5 has the lowest cost 2 , it is the best approximation to the
real-human stroke difficulty. Thus the human stroke difficulty                                             (a)                                         (b)
κh is determined as follows:
                                                                                     Fig. 4. Plotted results of the normalized stroke difficulty versus pocket
                                     cos θc 4.1−2.7θc                                probability for player one with corresponding regression lines. (a) All strokes
                           κh =                         .                   (15)     considered. (b) Without easy strokes.
                                        d10.33 d20.38
   2) Human Pocket Probability: This section develops a
model of the human pocket probability Ph ∈ [0; 1] to mea-                            stroke difficulty and pocket probability for the three stroke
sure the pocket probability of the human player depending on                         difficulty measures is shown in Table III. For small values of
the human stroke difficulty as follows:                                              d1 and d2 , both human stroke difficulty and expert stroke dif-
                                                                                     ficulty become very large and cannot be represented properly
                                    Ph = fp (κh )                           (16)
                                                                                     by a linear model. Thus the correlation coefficient has been
thus linking the two measures in a similar way to the                                recalculated as shown in Table IV, neglecting the interval with
AAD stroke difficulty and the pocket probability. To model                           the highest stroke difficulty values. The linear relation when
Ph precisely over a wide variety of (θc , d1 , d2 )-triplets,                        neglecting very easy strokes shows that humans act indeed
a Monte Carlo approach is used that evaluates random strokes                         rationally when selecting the stroke with the lowest human
occurring during a series of conducted pool games.                                   stroke difficulty as it is the one with the highest chance to
   In total, four participants (3 males, 24–36 years, Ø29 years)                     pocket a ball.
took part in the third experiment. Two players are intermediate                         Fig. 4 displays the obtained results for player one, showing
amateurs who frequently play a few pool games per week, and                          the intervals and the computed linear regression function for
two are novice players with hardly any experience. Participants                      the mapping from human stroke difficulty to human pocket
were grouped into dyads of equal playing skill. Their task was                       probability. The three different relations correspond to the
to play multiple games while sticking to direct strokes and                          expert stroke difficulty, the AAD stroke difficulty, and the
hitting the cue ball centrally. The stroke results are split into                    human model developed in this section. When using the expert
11 intervals depending on their stroke difficulty. For comparing                     stroke difficulty or AAD stroke difficulty, a nonlinear relation
the influence of AAD stroke difficulty, expert stroke difficulty,                    between pocket probability and stroke difficulty is observable
and human stroke difficulty on the human pocket probability,                         for small stroke difficulty values. This results in lower corre-
all measures are normalized to the [0; 1] interval. For every                        lation coefficients for κ, AAD compared to κh as calculated in
interval, the mean pocket probability and mean stroke diffi-                         Tables III and IV. Based on the results, the relation between
culty are calculated. Pearson’s correlation coefficient between                      Ph and κh can be determined individually for each player.
           This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

NIERHOFF et al.: ROBOTIC BILLIARDS: UNDERSTANDING HUMANS IN ORDER TO COUNTER THEM                                                                                  7

                                                                                    to simulate only the next n actions, resulting in an approximate
                                                                                    value function V̂ π as follows:
                                                                                                             n                       
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  π
                                                                                                V̂ (S) = E        γ R St , At,{r,h}
                                                                                                                    t
                                                                                                                                                (19)
                                                                                                                     t=0                         S0 =S

                                                                                    and approximate action-value function
                                                                                                           n                       
                                                                                                           
                                                                                          Q̂π (S, A) = Eπ     γ t R(St , At,{r,h} )                           . (20)
Fig. 5. MLE of the human discount factor γh for a novice player and an                                              t=0                         S0 =S,A0 =A
intermediate player. Only the maximum of each plot is of interest. A discount
factor γh = 0 stands for a player not planning at all whereas a discount factor     Yet this causes other problems as for the MAXPROB MDPs,
γh = 1 accounts for good planning capabilities.
                                                                                    a reward R = 0 is only assigned whenever a goal state is
                                                                                    reached, i.e., a game is won. Thus in theory every branch
                                                                                    of the tree must be expanded until reaching a goal state or a
For player one, it becomes
                                                                                    known dead end to evaluate its outcome, which, however, may
                      0.36κh + 0.27           ∀ κh ∈ [0; 2.02]                      take more than n actions. This is overcome by introducing an
 Ph = fp (κh ) =                                                           (17)     reward Rη as follows:
                      1                       ∀ κh ∈ [2.02; ∞].

   3) Human Discount Factor: So far only the humans’ skill is                                       +1     for every pocketed ball of the robot
                                                                                          Rη =                                                                  (21)
discussed, specifying how well they can pocket balls. Another                                       −1     for every pocketed ball of the human
aspect are planning capabilities, defining how much they think
about future states when planning their next stroke. Similar                        which helps to estimate the outcome of an action whenever
to (4), it is modeled by a discounted reward factor γh . Whereas                    the first ball gets pocketed. This serves as a bias of the planner
a small γh value implies that the player focuses more on the                        toward strokes for which most balls of the own color and least
current situation, a large discount factor γh indicates that he                     balls of the opponent’s color are pocketed. In addition, the
also takes future table states into account. The data from the                      original condition of a reward R = 1 when winning a game is
third experiment can be used to compute an individual dis-                          relaxed to
count factor γh for every participant by a maximum likelihood                                                      +w if robot wins
estimation (MLE) maximizing the percentage of correctly pre-                                             Rυ =                                                   (22)
                                                                                                                   −w if human wins
dicted stroke decisions for every player over the parameter
γh as follows:                                                                      with constant w. The combined reward R is defined as follows:
                         γ̂h = argmax L(γh | ).                            (18)                                     R = Rη + Rυ .                               (23)
                                    γh

Results of the MLE for two dyads for a planning depth of 1                          The constant w weights the importance of pocketing a ball
are displayed in Fig. 5 and [47]. While the intermediate player                     with respect to a win/loss of the game. A high w-value results
attested to think about the outcome of a stroke (γh > 0), the                       in an aggressive game style if the planner sees a chance to win
novice player confirmed that he solely focuses on the easiest                       the game and a defensive game style if there is a chance for
stroke (γh = 0). This corresponds to the displayed results,                         the opponent to win the game. The chosen reward R does have
with γ̂h ≈ 0.55 for the intermediate player and γ̂h ≈ 0 for the                     a physical meaning as for w = 0 and γ = 1 the value func-
novice player.                                                                      tion V̂ π (S) represents the expected number of balls that the
                                                                                    robot will pocket more than the human over the next n strokes
                                                                                    following the policy π . Similarly, the action-value function
                   V. P OOL -S PECIFIC A DAPTION                                    Q̂π (S, A) denotes the difference of pocketed balls for a given
   This section describes how the general framework presented                       policy when executing the stroke A. During tree creation, prun-
in Section II-B is modified and combined with the stroke dif-                       ing is used to reduce computational complexity further: only
ficulty and pocket probability measures in Sections IV and IV                       the most promising strokes are simulated, i.e., the ones that
to fit pool-specific needs. The two main challenges that must                       aim at pocketing a ball of the own color with a direct shot. The
be overcome are a high computational complexity when solv-                          combination of all three methods leads to a considerable reduc-
ing the MAXPROB MDP and the derivation of an optimized                              tion of computational complexity as it is sufficient to simulate
policy.                                                                             only a subset of all possible strokes over the next n turns.
   Solving the MAXPROB MDP involves the creation of a                                  Once a search tree is created, an optimized policy must
search tree. Expanding the search tree means to run a pool                          be derived for computing the next stroke. Backward induc-
simulation that predicts the outcome of a stroke for a given                        tion is used to iteratively evaluate the value function V̂ π (St )
state on the table. Yet running a pool simulation is a time-                        backwards in time to find V̂ π (St−1 ) and the optimized stroke
costly operation and as such an approximate scheme must be                          parameters for each stroke. It is started by calculating the
used that limits the number of pool simulations. A first step is                    action-value function for every leaf node of the search tree
            This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

8                                                                                                                           IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS

                                                                                                                     TABLE V
of depth n. This is the reward R weighted with its pocket                                                PARAMETERS FOR THE E XPERIMENTAL
probability as follows:                                                                                            E VALUATION

                                 Ps,i Rn if robot’s turn
            Q̂π (Sn , An ) =                                                (24)
                                 Ph,i Rn if human’s turn.
In (24), the variable Ps,i stands for the pocket probability of
the ith ball–pocket combination according to (11) using the
AAD stroke difficulty and Ph,i for the human pocket probabil-
ity according to (16). Based on Q̂π (Sn , An ), the value function
V̂ π (Sn ) is calculated as follows:
                            ⎧
                            ⎨max Ps,i Rn if r’s turn
               V̂ π (Sn ) =   i                               (25)
                            ⎩min Ph,i Rn if h’s turn.
                                  i
The value function is split up into two cases, accounting for
the competitive nature of the game. As such the robot tries to
maximize the value function, whereas the human tires to min-                                                 (a)                             (b)
imize it. During backward induction, the action-value function
Q̂π (St−1 , At−1 ) is calculated in an intermediate step to derive                   Fig. 6. Effect of a varied planning depth based upon 200 randomly selected
                                                                                     table states using Venn diagrams. (a) Ignoring and (b) considering robot
V̂ π (St−1 ). Because the outcome of each stroke is nondetermin-                     kinematic constraints and the human model.
istic due to the limited motor skill of each player, it has to be
weighted with the probability density function f{r,h} [see (10)].
This results in                                                                      by a ceiling camera, indicating that the human opponent out-
     π                                                                               performs the robot with respect to motor skill (smaller σp , σθ )
    Q̂ (St−1 , At−1 )
                                                                                   but is inferior to the robot concerning planning capabilities
          = Eπ Rt−1 + γ V̂ π (St )                                                   (smaller γ ).
            ⎧                          
            ⎨         Rt−1 + γr V̂ π (St ) fr dp dθ if r’s turn
          =                                                             (26)     A. Simulations
            ⎩         Rt−1 + γh V̂ π (St ) fh dp dθ if h’s turn
                                                                                        Simulations make it possible to estimate the individual
with γr as the discount factor of the robot and γh as the human                      influence of a variety of factors without the need to per-
discount factor according to (18). Note that the integrals in (26)                   form time-consuming experiments. For all simulations, a pool
can only be approximated due to a discrete search tree. The                          simulator programmed in C++\Qt is used [44], whereas the
value function V̂ π (St−1 ) is then calculated as follows:                           planning framework according to Section V is implemented
                                                                                     in MATLAB R2013b.
           V̂ π (St−1 ) = optimize Q̂π (St−1 , At−1 )                                   A first simulation aims at displaying the influence of a
                               At−1
                           ⎧                                                         varied search depth n [see (24)]. As discussed in [27], the
                           ⎨ max Q̂π (St , At )      if r’s turn                     effectiveness of a search depth of 2 is still an unsolved ques-
                              μp ,μθ
                       =                                                    (27)     tion. Differing from deterministic board games such as chess
                           ⎩ min Q̂π (St , At )      if h’s turn.
                              μp ,μθ                                                 or backgammon where the search depth is among the most
                                                                                     influencing factors, the probabilistic nature of pool makes it
Having obtained V̂ π (S0 ), the optimized stroke parameters
                                                                                     more difficult to answer the question. Archibald et al. [27]
μp , μθ for the actual stroke can be directly derived as they
                                                                                     found out that both a search depth of 2 and a more densely
are the ones optimizing V̂ π (S0 ). The framework can be seen                        sampled action space of depth 1 have a similar influence on
as an expectiminimax tree [48] with an additional optimization                       the percentage to win. In our simulation, a total of 200 strokes
step for each node to calculate the optimal reward.                                  for random pool states is processed with a search depth
                                                                                     of 0–2. The first simulation scenario is similar to the experi-
                             VI. E VALUATION                                         ment in [27] as it neither includes robot kinematic constraints
   The evaluation of the planning algorithm is both based upon                       nor the human model [we use (11) instead of (16) to model
simulations and by using an anthropomorphic robot facing                             the human decision process]. In contrast, both human model
a human opponent on a real-pool table. Simulations allow                             and robot kinematic constraint are incorporated in the sec-
for a fast evaluation of a large number of strokes to mea-                           ond scenario. Simulation results are shown in Venn diagrams
sure the individual influence of various aspects. In contrast,                       in Fig. 6. As such for 17 strokes, the planning results for
the real-world scenario demonstrates the validity of the entire                      a depth of 0 and 1 are similar. Compared to [27], most of
framework. For both experiments, the pool simulator described                        the strokes—105 for the first scenario and 77 for the second
in [44] is used.                                                                     scenario—are similar for different search depths and a var-
   The individual parameters of robot and human in Table V                           ied search depth influences the decision in just about 20% of
are determined through hundreds of analyzed strokes recorded                         all cases. This indicates that a search depth of 2 has only a
           This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

NIERHOFF et al.: ROBOTIC BILLIARDS: UNDERSTANDING HUMANS IN ORDER TO COUNTER THEM                                                                             9

Fig. 7. Number of robot wins for different scenarios after 2400 games
played in simulation. Right side: significance level of every comparison using
a two-sample t-test.

Fig. 8. Number of robot wins for different planning depths after 2400 games
played in simulation. Right side: significance level of every comparison using
a two-sample t-test.
                                                                                    Fig. 9.   Overview of the anthropomorphic robot.

minor influence on the decision process and can be probably                         B. Experimental Evaluation With Robotic Platform
overcome by a more densely sampled action space of depth 1.                            The hardware setup for the experimental evaluation con-
   The next simulation illustrates the effect of incorporating                      sists of a robot with a pair of 7-DoF anthropomorphic arms
the human decision process in the planning framework. Three                         mounted on an omnidirectional platform (see Fig. 9). Special
different runs are performed, depending on the way the robot                        gimbal-based end effectors are designed to hold the cue prop-
kinematic constraints of Section III-A are treated. For the                         erly. A Basler acA1300-30gm ceiling-mounted camera with
“without repositioning” run, whenever the robot is unable to                        a resolution of 1280 × 960 px and a frame rate of up to
reach a ball, it is considered as a foul. In the “with reposition-                  40 Hz mounted approximately 2.50 m above the table pro-
ing” run, the white ball is slightly moved such that the robot                      vides information about the cue and ball positions, being able
is able to execute a legal stroke whenever the robot is unable                      to distinguish between white, black, striped, and solid balls.
to reach a ball. Finally, in the “without constraints” run, there                   In order to place the cue properly behind the cue ball, com-
are no kinematic constraints, i.e., the robot is able to reach                      bined data of the camera, the robot’s Sick S300 laser range
any position on the table. Every run consists of two scenar-                        finders, arm pose data, and two JR3 end effector force/torque
ios evaluating the effect of the human decision process when                        sensors is used. The robot is able to move autonomously
planning ahead. For every scenario, 1200 games are evaluated                        around the table by detecting the legs of the pool table and
twice, both with robot and human as starting player. When                           execute a stroke independently. Two onboard computers with
considering the human decision process, it is modeled accord-                       a 2.66 GHz Intel Pentium i7 920 CPU and 12 GB RAM
ing to Section IV. Otherwise, (11) is used instead of (16) to                       control both arms and the platform. The combination of a
model the human pocket probability. The number of robot wins                        proprietary real-time data base [49] for data exchange with a
of every run is checked for significance using a two-sample                         real-time architecture [50] allows an update rate of 1000 Hz
t-test. Results are shown in Fig. 7. It is visible that for all                     while sufficing hard real-time constraints.
runs the inclusion of the human decision process significantly                         To create an search tree within reasonable time, pool simula-
improves the win rate.                                                              tions are parallelized over 40 computers equipped with a AMD
   The last simulation displays the necessity to include a pre-                     Phenom II X6 1075T 3 GHz CPU and 8 GB RAM. Another
cise model of the robot’s kinematic constraints as shown                            computer with similar specifications is used to compute an
in Section III in the planner and the effect of a varied                            optimal stroke as described in Section V based on the com-
search depth of the robot. Similar to the previous simulation,                      puted search tree. During tree creation, a variable branching
1200 games are evaluated twice. Two different runs are con-                         factor in the range of 300 is used, resulting in a about 100 000
sidered. For both runs, it is considered as a foul whenever the                     computed strokes for a search depth of 2. The planning capa-
robot is unable to reach a ball during stroke execution. The                        bilities of the robot are evaluated by comparing two scenarios
difference is that no kinematic constraints are considered when                     with the same human opponent. In the first scenario, the search
planning ahead for the “deceived repositioning” run, whereas                        depth n is set to 0 [see (19)]. The stroke intensity p has been
kinematic constraints are considered when planning ahead for                        set to a constant value of 0.17 ns. In total, seven games have
the without repositioning run. On can see in Fig. 8 that a                          been played, resulting in 89 strokes of the robot. In the second
search depth of 1 significantly improves the robot’s win rate.                      scenario, the search depth n is set to 2 while also considering
Moreover, considering the robot’s kinematic constraints when                        the human decision-making according to Section IV. Here six
planning ahead increases the win rate by around 20%–25%.                            games have been played, resulting in 67 strokes of the robot.
          This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

10                                                                                                                        IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS

                                                                                   win ratio. Real-world experiments with an anthropomorphic
                                                                                   robotic platform prove that extensive planning significantly
                                                                                   helps for a better position play.
                                                                                      Future work will be focused on employing reinforcement
                                                                                   learning for better online adaption to the human model, result-
Fig. 10. Number of successful strokes for different search depths using an         ing in a better overall performance against each individual
anthropomorphic robot. Right side: significance level of every comparison
using a two-sample t-test.                                                         player.

There are not enough games played for any conclusion about                                                         R EFERENCES
the statistical significance of the number of wins/losses. It is,                   [1] D. Kulić and E. A. Croft, “Safe planning for human–robot interaction,”
however, possible to draw conclusions by looking at the indi-                           J. Robot. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 383–396, 2005.
vidual strokes. A stroke is considered as “successful” if the                       [2] N. Sebanz, H. Bekkering, and G. Knoblich, “Joint action: Bodies and
                                                                                        minds moving together,” Trends Cogn. Sci., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 70–76,
robot can pocket a ball and without committing a foul, thus                             2006.
corresponding to the with repositioning run in Fig. 7. All other                    [3] M. Huber et al., “Spatiotemporal movement planning and rapid adap-
strokes executed by the robot are considered to be “unsuccess-                          tation for manual interaction,” PLoS ONE, vol. 8, no. 5, 2013,
                                                                                        Art. ID e64982.
ful.” Using this definition, the two results differ significantly                   [4] D. Feil-Seifer and M. J. Mataric, “Defining socially assistive robotics,”
from each other (based on a two sample t-test) as only 25                               in Proc. IEEE ICORR, Chicago, IL, USA, 2005, pp. 465–468.
out of the 89 strokes are successful for the first scenario                         [5] K. Nickel and R. Stiefelhagen, “Visual recognition of pointing ges-
                                                                                        tures for human–robot interaction,” Image Vis. Comput., vol. 25, no. 12,
whereas 34 out of the 67 strokes are successful for the second                          pp. 1875–1884, 2007.
scenario Fig. 10.                                                                   [6] B. Kühnlenz et al., “Increasing helpfulness towards a robot by emotional
                                                                                        adaption to the user,” Int. J. Soc. Robot., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 457–476, 2013.
                                                                                    [7] M. A. Goodrich and A. C. Schultz, “Human–robot interaction:
C. Discussion                                                                           A survey,” Found. Trends Human Comput. Interact., vol. 1, no. 3,
   The performed experiments show that both excessive plan-                             pp. 203–275, 2007.
                                                                                    [8] T. Wösch and W. Feiten, “Reactive motion control for human–robot
ning and learning a model of the opponent significantly                                 tactile interaction,” in Proc. IEEE ICRA, Washington, DC, USA, 2002,
improve the outcome of a pool game. Still, there are some                               pp. 3807–3812.
more general aspects regarding the human model to be                                [9] A. De Santis, “Modelling and control for human–robot interaction,”
                                                                                        Ph.D. dissertation, Dipartimento di Informatica e Sistemistica, Università
discussed.                                                                              degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Napoli, Italy, 2007.
   A quite unique problem at pool is the coupling between a                        [10] J. R. Medina, M. Lawitzky, A. Mortl, D. Lee, and S. Hirche, “An
player’s skill in terms of success rate when pocketing a ball                           experience-driven robotic assistant acquiring human knowledge to
                                                                                        improve haptic cooperation,” in Proc. IEEE IROS, San Francisco, CA,
and his planning capabilities. A chess player’s skill is pri-                           USA, 2011, pp. 2416–2422.
marily determined by his planning capabilities whereas the                         [11] Y. Demiris, “Prediction of intent in robotics and multi-agent systems,”
success of a golf player depends mainly on his skill when                               Cogn. Process., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 151–158, 2007.
                                                                                   [12] W. Erlhagen et al., “Action understanding and imitation learning in
doing a golf swing. Yet with the exception of novice pool                               a robot-human task,” in Proc. ICANN, vol. 1. Warsaw, Poland, 2005,
player, one cannot tell by just looking at the result of a game                         pp. 261–268.
whether a victory comes from superior skill or planning. The                       [13] N. Sebanz and G. Knoblich, “Prediction in joint action: What, when,
                                                                                        and where,” Topics Cogn. Sci., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 353–367, 2009.
used robotic platform during the experimental evaluation pos-                      [14] S. S. Obhi and N. Sebanz, “Moving together: Towards understanding the
sesses superior planning capabilities but inferior motor skill                          mechanisms of joint action,” Exper. Brain Res., vol. 211, pp. 329–336,
compared to the human opponent. Thus hardware improve-                                  Jun. 2011.
                                                                                   [15] G. Bornstein, “Intergroup conflict: Individual, group and collective
ments resulting in lower standard deviations σp and σθ are                              interests,” Center Study Ration., Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel,
expected to have a major impact on the outcome of a game.                               Tech. Rep. dp297, 2002.
   Only strokes up to a search depth of 2 are simulated. Due                       [16] Z. Wang et al., “Probabilistic modeling of human movements for
                                                                                        intention inference,” in Proc. RSS, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 2012.
to imperfect calibration, the deviation between simulation and                     [17] P. Sastry, V. Phansalkar, and M. Thathachar, “Decentralized learning of
experimental results increases as the search tree is extended                           Nash equilibria in multi-person stochastic games with incomplete infor-
deeper. To account for this problem, one may introduce an                               mation,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 769–777,
                                                                                        May 1994.
additional parameter which weights future strokes less. Still                      [18] M. Campbell, A. J. Hoane, Jr., and F.-H. Hsu, “Deep blue,” Artif. Intell.,
this parameter is different from the discount factor γ{r,h} that                        vol. 134, nos. 1–2, pp. 57–83, 2002.
accounts for the planning capabilities of human and robot.                         [19] A. Al-Tamimi, M. Abu-Khalaf, and F. Lewis, “Adaptive critic designs
                                                                                        for discrete-time zero-sum games with application to H∞ control,” IEEE
                                                                                        Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. B, Cybern., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 240–247,
                          VII. C ONCLUSION                                              Feb. 2007.
                                                                                   [20] M. M. Veloso and P. Stone, “Video: RoboCup robot soccer history
   This paper deals with the question how a robot facing a                              1997–2011,” in Proc. IROS, Vilamoura, Portugal, 2012, pp. 5452–5453.
human in a competitive task can improve its performance                            [21] W. Leckie and M. Greenspan, “An event-based pool physics simulator,”
through extensive planning and precise representation of                                in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Adv. Comput. Games, Taipei, Taiwan, 2005,
                                                                                        pp. 247–262.
the opponent’s behavior. This allows the robot to adapt to                         [22] R. E. Wallace and M. C. Schroeder, “Analysis of billiard ball collisions
human-specific decision-making and the opponent’s individual                            in two dimensions,” Amer. J. Phys., vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 815–819, 1988.
motor skill while overcoming its own kinematic constraints.                        [23] D. Gugan, “Inelastic collision and the hertz theory of impact,”
                                                                                        Amer. J. Phys., vol. 68, no. 10, pp. 920–924, 1999.
Simulations show that including the human model in the                             [24] I. Han, “Dynamics in carom and three cushion billiards,” J. Mech. Sci.
planning framework of the robot significantly improves the                              Technol., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 976–984, 2005.
           This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

NIERHOFF et al.: ROBOTIC BILLIARDS: UNDERSTANDING HUMANS IN ORDER TO COUNTER THEM                                                                                11

[25] R. Cross, “Cue and ball deflection in billiards,” Amer. J. Phys., vol. 76,                                Thomas Nierhoff received the B.Sc. and Dipl.-Ing.
     no. 3, pp. 205–212, 2007.                                                                                 (M.Sc. equivalent) degrees in electrical engineering
[26] M. Smith, “Pickpocket: A computer billiards shark,” Artif. Intell.,                                       from Technische Universität München, Munich,
     vol. 171, pp. 1069–1091, Nov. 2007.                                                                       Germany, in 2009 and 2010.
[27] C. Archibald, A. Altman, and Y. Shoham, “Analysis of a winning com-                                          He was a Research Assistant with the Institute
     putational billiards player,” in Proc. IJCAI, Pasadena, CA, USA, 2009,                                    of Information-Oriented Control, Technische
     pp. 1377–1382.                                                                                            Universität München. From 2012 to 2014, he was
[28] J.-F. Landry and J.-P. Dussault, “AI optimization of a billiard player,”                                  a Visiting Researcher with Nakamura Laboratory,
     J. Intell. Robot. Syst., vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 399–417, 2007.                                               University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. His current
[29] J.-F. Landry, J.-P. Dussault, and P. Mahey, “Billiards: An optimization                                   research interests include robotics, motion planning,
     challenge,” in Proc. 4th Int. C* Conf. Comput. Sci. Softw. Eng., Montreal,                                and machine learning.
     QC, Canada, 2011, pp. 129–132.
[30] Z. M. Lin, J.-S. Yang, and C. Y. Yang, “Grey decision-making for a
     billiard robot,” in Proc. IEEE SMC, The Hague, The Netherlands, 2004,
     pp. 5350–5355.                                                                                         Konrad Leibrandt received the Dipl.-Ing. (M.Sc.
[31] S. C. Chua, E. K. Wong, and V. C. Koo, “Intelligent pool decision                                      equivalent) degree in electrical engineering from
     system using zero-order Sugeno fuzzy system,” J. Intell. Robot. Syst.,                                 Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany,
     vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 161–186, 2005.                                                                     in 2012, and the M.Res. degree in medical robotics
[32] C. Archibald and Y. Shoham, “Modeling billiards games,” in Proc.                                       and image guided intervention from Imperial
     AAMAS, Budapest, Hungary, 2009, pp. 193–199.                                                           College London, London, U.K., in 2013, where he is
[33] W. Cheung and S. Sang, “Automating skills using a robot snooker                                        currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Hamlyn
     player,” Ph.D. dissertation, Bristol Univ., U.K., 1994.                                                Centre for Robotic Surgery and the Department of
[34] M. Greenspan et al., “Toward a competitive pool playing robot: Is com-                                 Computing.
     putational intelligence needed to play robotic pool?” in Proc. IEEE CIG,                                  His current research interests include active con-
     Honolulu, HI, USA, 2007, pp. 380–388.                                                                  straints and virtual fixtures, ergonomic control for
[35] (2010). The pr2 Plays Pool. Willow Garage. [Online]. Available:                human–robot interaction in surgery, continuum robot control, and high-
     http://www.willowgarage.com/blog/2010/06/15/pr2-plays-pool                     performance parallel computing for surgical applications.
[36] T. Nierhoff, O. Kourakos, and S. Hirche, “Playing pool with a
     dual-armed robot,” in Proc. IEEE ICRA, Shanghai, China, 2010,
     pp. 3445–3446.
[37] N. Jarrassé, T. Charalambous, and E. Burdet, “A framework to describe,
     analyze and generate interactive motor behaviors,” PLoS ONE, vol. 7,                                     Tamara Lorenz received the Diploma (M.Sc.
     no. 11, 2012, Art. ID e49945.                                                                            equivalent) degree in mechanical engineering
[38] A. Kolobov, Mausam, and D. S. Weld, “A theory of goal-oriented                                           from Technische Universität München (TUM),
     MDPs with dead ends,” in Proc. UAI, Catalina Island, CA, USA, 2012,                                      Munich, Germany, specializing in human–machine
     pp. 438–447.                                                                                             interaction and medical engineering, and the
[39] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Introduction to Reinforcement Learning,                                    Ph.D. degree from the Graduate School of
     1st ed. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1998.                                                             Systemic Neurosciences, Ludwig–Maximilians
[40] E. A. Hansen and S. Zilberstein, “Lao∗ : A heuristic search algorithm that                               Universität (LMU), Munich, in 2015.
     finds solutions with loops,” Artif. Intell., vol. 129, nos. 1–2, pp. 35–62,                                 She was a Research Assistant with the Institute
     2001.                                                                                                    of Information-Oriented Control, TUM. She was
[41] A. G. Barto, S. J. Bradtke, and S. P. Singh, “Learning to act using real-                                with the Department of Experimental Psychology,
     time dynamic programming,” Artif. Intell., vol. 72, nos. 1–2, pp. 81–138,      LMU from 2009 to 2013. Her current research interests include dynamics
     1995.                                                                          and rules that underlie human–human interaction and how human interaction
[42] J. Hoffmann and B. Nebel, “The FF planning system: Fast plan gen-              can be modeled to improve the interaction between humans and robots.
     eration through heuristic search,” J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 14, no. 1,
     pp. 253–302, 2001.
[43] A. Salazar and A. Sanchez-Lavega, “Motion of a ball on a rough hori-
     zontal surface after being struck by a tapering rod,” Eur. J. Phy., vol. 11,                             Sandra Hirche received the Diploma degree in
     no. 4, pp. 228–232, 1990.                                                                                mechanical engineering and transport systems from
[44] T. Nierhoff, K. Heunisch, and S. Hirche, “Strategic play for a                                           the Technical University of Berlin, Berlin, Germany,
     pool-playing robot,” in Proc. IEEE ARSO, Munich, Germany, 2012,                                          in 2002, and the Doctor of Engineering degree
     pp. 72–78.                                                                                               in electrical engineering and information technol-
[45] S. Chua, E. Wong, A. Tan, and V. Koo, “Decision algorithm for pool                                       ogy from Technische Universität München (TUM),
     using fuzzy system,” in Proc. ICAIET, Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia, 2002,                                     Munich, Germany, in 2005.
     pp. 370–375.                                                                                               She was an Associate Professor with TUM, where
[46] J.-P. Dussault and J.-F. Landry, “Optimization of a billiard player—                                     she has been a TUM Liesel Beckmann Distinguished
     Tactical play,” in Computers and Games. Berlin, Germany: Springer,                                       Professor and the Chair of Information-Oriented
     2006, pp. 256–270.                                                                                       Control with the Department of Electrical and
[47] K. Leibrandt, T. Lorenz, T. Nierhoff, and S. Hirche, “Modelling human          Computer Engineering since 2013. She has published over 150 papers in
     gameplay at pool and countering it with an anthropomorphic robot,”             international journals, books, and refereed conferences. Her current research
     in Proc. ICSR, Bristol, U.K., 2013, pp. 30–39.                                 interests include cooperative, distributed and networked control with applica-
[48] S. J. Russell and P. Norvig, Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach,       tions in human–robot interaction, multirobot systems, and general robotics.
     2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Pearson Educ., 2003.                         Dr. Hirche was a recipient of the Post-Doctoral Scholar Award from the
[49] M. Goebl and G. Färber, “A real-time-capable hard-and software                 Japanese Society for the Promotion of Science, Fujita Laboratory, Tokyo
     architecture for joint image and knowledge processing in cognitive auto-       Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan, from 2005 to 2007, multiple awards
     mobiles,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp., Istanbul, Turkey, 2007,            such as the Rohde and Schwarz Award for her Ph.D. thesis in 2005, the IFAC
     pp. 734–740.                                                                   World Congress Best Poster Award in 2005, and together with students the
[50] D. Brscic et al., “Multi joint action in CoTeSys—Setup and challenge,”         Best Paper Awards of the IEEE Worldhaptics and the IFAC Conference of
     CoTeSys Cluster Excelence, Technische Universität München,                     Manoeuvring and Control of Marine Craft in 2009. From 2008 to 2012, she
     Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität         München,       Munich,     Germany,     served on the Editorial Board of the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C ONTROL
     Tech. Rep. CoTeSys-TR-10-01, 2010.                                             S YSTEMS T ECHNOLOGY and the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON H APTICS.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/robotic_pool_an_experiment_in_automatic_potting.pdf
title: Robotic Pool An Experiment In Automatic Potting
topics: collisions_and_impacts, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills, robotics_and_computation
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
Proceedings 01 2004 IEEE/RSI tnternational Conference on
   intelligent Robots and Systems
   September 28 - October 2,2004, Sendal, Japan

                       Robotic Pool: An Experiment in
                             Automatic Potting
                             Fei Long’, Johan Herland’, Marie-Christine Tessier’,
                      Danyl Naulls’, Andrew Roth3, Gerhard Roth4, Michael greens pan',*^'

     ‘Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2School of Computing, Queen’s University, Canada
                        3Dept. of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Canada
                41nstitute for Information Technology, National Research Council of Canada
                          ’corresponding author: michael.greenspan@ece.queensu.ca

   Abstract-A robotic system is presented wbicb automati-
cally pots (i.e., sinks) pwl balls. A homography is estimated
that relam the gantry robot coordinate frame to the over-
head (global) camera coordinate frame. This homography
is computed by lint calculating the mapping between the
camera frame and a pmjeclion of the robot frame, and
then solring the pool table plane equation in the robot
frame. A measurement technique has been developed which
is based upon a local camera attached to the mbot end-
effector. This local camera allows the robot to be positioned
accurately over circular targets placed on the table. The
homography and table plane equation are lhen estimated
by establishing correspondences between at lean 4 measured
target positions in the global camera and robot frames. The
resulting homograpby allows the gantry lo be positioned to
within an average of 0.6 mm ofa global m e i s frame p i t i a n
over the extent of a full sized pool table The system has been
used to pat a ball with 6790 accuracy over the extent of the              Fig. 1. System Components wilh Labcllcd Coordinale Frames
table, aith a high repeatability.
                     I . INTRODUCTION                               ation. Our belief is that higher-level planning and strategy
  Among the various forms of entertainment robotics                 will be motivated and informed by solutions to the lower-
robotic pool is emerging to be an intriguing and challenging        level sensing and actuation systems. A fundamental issue
problem. The game of pool demands high levels of percep-            is accuracy. It is possible to design a gantry robot that has
tion, strategy, and precision which make it ideally suited          fine-grain accuracy (-15pm) over the desired workplace.
for the computational challenges of a robotic system, and           For example, Coordinate Measurement Machines (CMMs)
pool is emerging as the “computer chess” of robotics. In            have such accuracy over similar working volumes. This
the early work of Shu et al. [l], a robotic gantry system           high degree of accuracy comes at a cost, however, and
was cousuucted to play snooker. Other work has tended to            such a device would be expensive, delicate, and unlikely
focus on high level strategy, independent of platform [Z].          to maintain accuracy while absorbing the impacts required
Recently, an automated pool training system was developed           when placing shots. A more reasonable approach is to de-
131 which includes a machine vision component, but no               mand less absolute accuracy from the primary positioning
robotic actuator.                                                   device, and to rely upon a vision system for fine-tuning.
   We describe the development of a system based upon                  In this work, we describe a method whereby a single
a gantry robot, shown in Fig.1. The main elements are:              overhead camera is used to improve the accuracy of the
a 5 dof gantry robot, a 1 dof cue end-effector, a ceiling           gantry on a plane. The method is validated experimentally,
mounted (global) camera, and a standard 4’x8’ pool table.           and is used as the basis to automatically pot (i.e., sink)
There is also an end-effector mounted (local) camera, that          balls. Sec.Il describes the problem as a mapping from 2D
is used here for calibration purposes, and that will be used        (camera) to 3D (robot) coordinates, and Sec.m presents a
in the future to compensate for positioning errors. One             method to solve this mapping. This solution requires iden-
difference between our system and previous work is our use          tifying a set of circular targets in both the camera and robot
of an end-effector mounted camera to improve positioning            frames, and Sec. IV, presents a process for locating these
accuracy.                                                           targets. An evaluation of the system accuracy is presented
   We are taking a bottom-up approach to the development,           in Sec.V, and an experiment in automatic potting (i.e. ball
and our efforts have focused on issues of sensing and acm-          sinking) is described in Sec. VI. The paper concludes in

   0-7803-8463-6/04/$20.00 82004 IEEE
                                                                   2520
Sec. VII with a summary and recommendations for future
work.

        11. SYSTEM A N D PROBLEM DEFINITION
   Let C be the global camera cwrdinate reference frame,
and let R be the robot frame. A point ‘$=“(z, y: z ) in C
is measured in pixel units ( U , v ) by its projection onto the
camera retinal plane T.Coordinates in R are measured by
the robot joint encoders, albeit with limited accuracy. The
table forms a 3D plane II which can be described in either
frame.
   The objective at this stage is to automatically pot a single
ball. To achieve this goal we must perceive the position of
the ball on II withim C, and calculate the correct location
within R to reposition the cue and place a shot. We must
therefore map coordinates which lie on lI from C to R;                   c) binary threshold            d) detected targets

             h:(u:v)-R(z:y:z)          V ‘@EH              (1)                       Fig. 2. Locating Targels in C

The function h is a 2D to 3D homography, which is a                                            n,
                                                                  ( u j : t i i ) of target j on the least square error estimate of
mapping that preserves collinearities and therefore maps          the corresponding projection onto e is then given by:
between planes in the two frames. Homographies have been
well-explored within the Computer Vision research com-
munity [4], and the 2D to 2 0 homography is particularly
useful in establishing correspondences between two camera            Eq.3 describes the mapping between R and Q up to
frames.                                                           a scale factor. To satisfy Eq.1, however, we require an
                                                                  additional mapping from      to lI, which we accomplish
                111. SOI.UlHON APPROACH                           by making further use of the measured targets in R. The
   A naive approach would assume that T,II, and the x-y           targets were positioned on lI, so the equation of Il in R
plane of R are all parallel, and solve Eq.1 based purely on       can be determined directly from the A’ values of            “R.
the geomeuy and scaling of their projections. It would in         As N > 3, the plane equation is calculated as the least
practice be difficult to ensure that these planes are parallel,   squares estimate of these measured values. The $bj and w j
and small deviations could result in large inaccuracies. It       determined from Eq.3 can then be substituted directly into
is also desirable for h to compensate for nonlinearities          the plane equation to solve directly for “(x,;yj;zj).
inberent in both the camera and the robot measurement
                                                                                    IV. TARGET EXTRACTION
systems.
   One possibility is to estimate h from a set of correspon-         Estimating H and 11 requires establishing correspon-
dences between the two frames. An alternative approach,           dences between N > 3 target locations. The center of each
which we take here, is to first estimate a 2D homography          circular target j is measured as a (uj,v j ) pixel location in
that relates II to C and R, and then apply the solution of        li, and as an yx.;  y, z ) robot
                                                                                              ~    location in R.
the plane equation of lI in R.
   In general, at least 4 non-collinear p i n t correspondences   A. Target Extraction in C
are required to compute the homography between two               Prior to target extraction, the radial distortion of the the
2D homogeneous spaces. In our case only the (.,U)             camera is estimated using a standard technique 151. All im-
camera frame measurements are in homogeneous coordi-          ages are corrected for radial distortion prior to subsequent
nates, whereas the robot R@ = y x >y: t) coordinates are      processing as illustrated in Fig.Zb. A simple threshold is
measured in Cartesian space. The R f l must therefore 6rst    then applied to produce a binary image from the g a y scale
be mapped into homogeneous coordinates:                       image. It can be seen in F i g 2 that the white circles of
                                                              the 8 targets pass easily through the binary filter, but that
                                                              some noise results. A connected components algorithm is
This is equivalent to projecting these coordinates onto the   applied next to remove the noise. Any components which
plane at z = 1 in R, which we shall denote as Y.              are significantly larger or smaller than the expected target
   We compute the homography between R and SJ by              size are considered as noise and eliminated. After this step,
placing a set of N 2 4 targets on lI. The targets are white   the remaining components belong to a Vue target circle, as
circles printed on a black background, and the center of      illussated in Fig. 2d. For each circle j , the edge points are
the zth target is determined as (vi:vi) in T and yx.:y, z ) ~ identified and a least square error estimate of the center
in R. The homogaphy H is a 3x3 mamx estimated                  (uj,ui)is determined [ti] and used as a target location in
from these correspondences. For any subsequent position       6.

                                                                  2521
                    A

                    -.
              .,
               .e
                    " '
                    0    .

                        C.
                    ._
      I                          c

     a) minimal 3 rotations                  b) actual ?I rotations
                             R ~ 3.. c m e i or ~otaion

B. Target Exrmcrion in R
   Whereas determining target locations in C is straight-
                                                                                                                    ::
forward, determining the corresponding locations in R is
more involved. To do so, it is necessary to position the
robot accurately over a target j at a fixed height offset.                                          Rp. 4.   Ermr VS. # of Ta~pel~
The values of the robot's 6rst 3 joint encoders are then
taken to be the target's 3D position in the robot frame, i.e.,                     to estimate the circle center in the least squared sense (61.
"(..Y:z)j.                                                                         Using 21 rotations as illustrated in Fig.3b, the center pixel
   The challenge is to position the robot over the target as                       was identified with an accuracy of 10.1 pixels, or 0.04
accurately as possible, One possibility is to mount a fixed                        mm.
pointing device, such as a pin, on the robot pointing down                            2) x-y Posirioning: Once the center of rotation has been
toward the center of the target. The robot could then be                           determined, the robot can be accurately positioned in x-y
manually 'Ijogged" to position the pin at the center point                         over a target center. First the robot is positioned so that the
and just touching the target. While this method is simple,                         target is entirely imaged within the local camera, and the
it is imprecise, subject to human error, and prohibitively                         target center and radius are extracted. The robot is then
labourious when many target locations are desired.                                 repositioned in x-y by the difference between the target
   As an alternative, we employ a small camera mounted on                          center and the previously determined rotation center. A new
the end-effector aimed down along the %-axis. The center                           image can he acquired in the new position and the above
and radius of a target as imaged from this camera is used                          steps repeated until the desired accuracy is achieved. In
to accurately position the robot over the target's center at                       practice, we have found that it takes 3 to 5 iterations to
a fixed % offset.                                                                  achieve a positional accuracy of f0.3 pixels (0.1 mm).
    I J Derennining the Cerirer of Rororion: We desire to                             3) z Posirioning: Once the robat is positioned accurately
position the robot %-axis directly over the target center. It                      in x-y, the z-offset of the robot can be determined from the
is therefore necessary to identify the pixel within the local                      target radius. First, the radius of the target at the desired
camera image plane that intersecs with this axis.                                  z-offset is predetermined. The current observed radius ;is
    This is accomplished by positioning the gantry roughly                         compared with the desired p. and the L value is adjusted
 over a target and acquiring an image with the local camera.                        accordingly. If; < p. then the robot is lowered toward the
 The robot is positioned in xyz using the first 3 proximal                         table: if      p, then it is raised. This is repeated until the
joints, with the distal revolute joints 4 and 5 in their home                       desired accuracy is achieved. In practice, we have found
 positions. The target center "(U, U), is extracted h.om the                        that it takes 5 to 10 iterations to achieve an accuracy of
 acquired image.                                                                    10.3 pixels (0.1 mm).
    Joint 4 is next rotated to at least 2 additional locations,                        Repeating the above x-y and L positioning processes, the
 and the target centers are extracted for each rotation. If the                     robot can be positioned accurately over each target, and the
 gantry were initially positioned such that 2' lay directly                         values of joints 1 to 3 for each target j yield R(x,y,z)?.
 over the target center, then all K extracted centers would be                      These values are combined with the corresponding target
 equal, i.e., " ( ~ , 2 1 ) , = ~ ( ~ , ~ ) 2. =. . = I ( u ~ u ) K . Otherwise,    centers (x,. U,) extracted from the global camera and are
 the K center points circumscribe a circle, the center of                           then used to estimate H and n in Eq.1.
 which is the intersection of % with the image plane of the
                                                                                          V. EXPERIMENT        MEASUREMENT
                                                                                                     1: ACCURACY
 local camera.
    l l i s process is illustrated in Fig.3a using 3 rotations,                      The objective of this experiment was to characterize
 which is the minimum required. Here, the 3 extracted                              the positioning error. There are a number of random and
 circles A, B, and C have respective centers a, b, and c.                          systemic sources of error in the system, including: limited
 The circle circumscribed by a, b, and c is centered at R,                         accuracy of the gantry controller; limited resolution of the
 which is the center of rotation of robot joint 4, i.e., the                       global camera; inaccuracies in the estimation of the lense
 intersection of % with ?i. In practice, it is both convenient                     radial distortion; and numerical errors in the homography
 and more accurate to use a larger number of rotations, and                        computation.

                                                                                   2522
                   Pig. 5.   I'olilioning Error                             Fig. 6. Positioning E r o r With Correction

                           TABLE I                                                          TABLE I1
                  P O S ~ O N ~ I?RKOR
                                N G (MM)                                 POSiilOKLHG ERROR WITB CORRECTION ( M M )

     The positioning error can be measured directly by a        was less than a threshold value. Those points with a l"er
process similar to that described in Sec.IV. The target is      reprojection error were believed to bias the result and were
placed on ll at a previously unmeasured location and its        removed. The targeu were then placed at an array of 6x13
center ( U ; U ) is extracted from the global camera image.     (i.e., a total of 78) positions evenly spaced over the table.
Eq.1 is then used to compute the robot frame coordinate         The robot was positioned above each target as described,
"(.:   y: i)and the robot is repositioned to this coordinate.   and the positioning error was measured. Fig.5 plots the
Once respositioned, the end-effector is centered over the       linearly interpolated distribution for the total error values
target at a fixed height, and an image of the target is         as a function of their table location. The magnitude of the
acquired from the local camera. The center of the target        minimum and maximum errors, and the mean and standard
is extracted from this image, and is compared with the          deviation for each directional component of the error and
previously determined center of rotation. The offset be-        the total error are also summarized in Table I.
tween these two values is the x-y positional error of the           It can he observed that the error increases significantly
process. The same process described above to compare the        over the lefhnost end of the table. The main reason for this
extracted target radius can be reapplied to determine the       behaviour is that these measurements were taken farthest
z-positioning error.                                            from the gantry home position. The measurement errors
     The estimation of H and the equation of IT was re-         and nonlinedies in the mechanism accumulate and are
peated 6 times using 4,8,... 32 respective target locations,    therefore more pronounced in this region. To reduce the
 distributed as evenly as possible over the extent of the       effect of this cumulative error on the remainder of the
 table. While minimally 4 correspondences are sufficient to     table, the target locations in this region exceeded the above
calculate H and 3 measurements for n, a more accurate           threshold value, and were discarded in the estimation of
least squares estimate can be obtained with a greater           H and II. The resulting estimates extrapolate rather than
number of measurements.                                         interpolate over this region, and therefore have a limited
     For each resulting estimate, the robot was positioned      accuracy therein.
 over another panem of 5 target locations using Eq.1 and            The major source of error is due to the limited accuracy
the positioning error was measured as described above. The      of the gantry positioning mechanism. As this error is
 sum of the positional errors in each direction and the total   systemic and therefore repeatable, we can improve the
error, as a function of the number of target locations, are     positioning accuracy by using the estimate of this error
 plotted in Fig.4. Whereas the z error continues to decrease    as a correction term. The three directional components
 with increasing number of targets, the x, y, and total error   of the error were configured into functions that returned
 are minimal for 12 locations.                                  an estimate of the directional error value for every table
     In a second stage, a robust estimation of H and ll were    position, and this estimate was added as a correction term
computed by selecting from the set of 32 target locations       to the each direction of the determined robot position.
the subset of 23 locations with a reprojection error that       The above experiment was then repeated for the 78 target

                                                                2523
    a) without correction              b) with correction

              Fig. 7.   Local Camcra V i m of Tagel

locations using this correction term, and the new error
measurements were plotted in Fig.6. It can be seen that the
total error is significantly reduced using this new scheme.
The errors for these plots are summarized in Table n.
Comparing against the corresponding values in Table I
it can be seen that the maximum, mean, and standard
deviation of the total error has been significantly reduced.
   The benefit of the use of error correction can be seen in
Fig.7. The target was placed on the table and its center was
extracted in the global camera image. The robot was then
positioned over the target using the coordinate calculated
from Eq.1. Fig.7a shows the target view from the local
camera when the error correction term was not used.
The expected target location and radius was overlayed in
the image, and the positioning error from the true target
                                                                              Fig. 8.   Motion Scqucnce When Placing Shot
location can be clearly seen. In Fig.7b, the robot was
repositioned using the error correction term. It can be seen         the cue ball, and so the cue was angled slightly from the
that the overlayed expected location and radius match the            horizontal by adjusting joint 5 . This configuration had the
true position much more closely when the correction term             benefit of allowing the end-effector to clear the table rails
is used.                                                             without colliding as shown in Fig.Pd. The offset distance
                                                                     was selected to be large enough so that the cue tip did not
       VI. EXPERIMENT        2: AUTOMATIC        POTIING
                                                                     touch the table surface at the end of its travel.
   At this stage, our goal is IO pot a single bail (the cue ball)       Once the robot position was calculated, the robot was
into a specific comer pocket. This is known as a srrufch, repositioned using a sequence of trapezoidal motions, as
and is an illegal shot by most rules. It is; however, the most       illustrated in Fig.8a-f. This sequence was designed to
basic skill in pool, and once mastered will lead directly to         position the robot correctly without colliding with the rails
more complex shots involving object balls.                           or the cue ball prior to placing the shot. Starting from the
   The experiment will evaluate how accurately the system            home position (a), the robot is raised to its maximum z-
can automatically pot the cue ball into the target pocket            height and repositioned in joints 1.2,4, and 5. This placed
at various distances and angles. We h t manually select a            it in the correct x,y location with the correct shooting
pixel point (U;U), in the global camera image at the center          angles, raised above the table (b). The robot next drew back
of the "jaw" of the target pocket. This point indicates the          the cue and lowered in z (c), and placed the shot (e). If
target pocket location. The cue ball is then identified in           the positions were calculated correctly and the positioning
the global camera image using the same process as the                accuracy sufficient, then the cue ball should sink into the
circular target extraction described in Sec.N. The cue ball          target pocket (0.
center location ( U , U ) ~and (u,u)t are both mapped into              The cue ball was placed at a variety of positions on
their respective R coordinates, "(.: y: z ) , and "(+:    y; z ) ~ , the table, and the success with which the system potted
using Eq.l._The R vector connecting these two points is              was recorded. The shots where taken at a single moderate
denoted as V,,, and indicates the direction from which the           striking velocity of 1 d s , which is approximately 113 of
cue should strike the ball.                                          the cue's maximum strike velocity. For each location, three
   To place the shot, it is necessary to position the cue at         separate shots were placed, and the results of these exper-
a specific fixed heigh: above the table, at a certain k e d          iments were summarized in Fig.9, where the o symbols
offset distance along V,, from yx.:     y, z ) ~ The
                                                 . fixed height      indicate the table positions that resulted in successful pots,
and offset distances were predetermined manually so that             and x indicate those positions that resulted in failed pots.
the cue would strike the ball after it has accelerated to            Overall, the system had a success rate of 67%. potting 44
the desired strike velocity. In human play, it is common             of the 66 shots. The shots that were not successful occurred
for the cue to have a slight downward angle when striking            more frequently in certain regions of the table, away from

                                                                  2524
          Fig. 9. Potting RCSUIIS.I m/s (a=pot, x=mins)                     Pig. 10. Polling Resulls. 2 m / s (o=pot,xsmiss)

the central corridor, and were not panicularly strongly          modelling the robot coordinate frame as a Cartesian system
correlated with distance from the pocket. This is indicative     with a linear non-parametric correction term. It may he
of a remaining systemic error in the gantry positioning,         more suitable to develop a higher order parametric estimate
and indeed there was a noticeable and repeatable offset          of this error term. Rather than one overhead camera, it may
when the gantry was positioned in the regions of the table       also be beneficial to use two or more cameras, each with a
adjacent to the target pocket, i.e.. the lower regions of        longer focal length, which therefore resolve the target and
Fig.9.                                                           ball locations to a greater precision.
   This experiment was repeated for a striking velocity of          An alternative approach to improve accuracy is to make
2 d s , and the results plotted in Fig.10. The panem of          use of a local vision system mounted on the end-effector.
successful pots is very similar to those in the previous         The role of the global vision system would then be to
trials, with the number of pots dropping toward the edges        identify the hall locations in the table coordinate frame, and
of the table. It was expected that the success rate would        the local vision system would correct for gantry positioning
tend to drop with a higher striking velocity, as tends to        errors by comparing the locations of the balls in the local
occur in human play. This was not observed. however,             image with their known positions in the table frame. In
and indeed, it was noticed that the success rate in the          this way, the gantry positioning system requires only a '
lower extremity of the table actually increased 31 the higher    limited accuracy, which is more than likely satisfied ushg
velocity. The explanation is that that the slight positional     the techniques presented here.
inaccuracies over this table region imparted a spin on the          Potting object balls is similar to the process described
hall, which was beneficial to the shooting direction, and        here, but requires greater positioning accuracy. In the
therefore increased potting success.                             future, we plan to implement the local vision sysiem to
                                                                 improve positional accuracy. We will also implement a
          VII. SUMMARY
                     A N D FUTUHE
                                WORK                             ball identification method based upon color indexing, and
   Pm1 is a game that requires a high level of positional        collision detection. Beyond that, developing a competitive
accuracy. Despite its popularity and long history, there         system will require research into the physics of cue, ball,
exists no information about the positioning accuracy that        and table interactions 171. and strategy.
is required to play effectively. Without an a priori accuracy                         ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
constraint, the approach that we have taken is to implement
                                                                   We gratefully acknowledge NSERC, CFI, WS,         and our
the system based upon a general gantry robot, determine          industrial sponsors for partially funding this work.
its potting performance experimentally, and iteratively im-
prove the accuracy until a suitable level of performance is                                  REFERENCES
achieved.                                                        [ I ] Sang william Shu. A I C O I MW~l l ~s Usbig
                                                                                                               ~     (I Robot Smoker Pioyrr.

   In this work, we have improved the accuracy of a gantry             PhD thesis. Bristol Univcraltr 1994.
                                                                 121 S.C. C h u a E.K. Wong, AI& W.C. Tan. and V.C. KOO. Decision
using a calibration technique based upon an overhead                   algorithm for pool using B"zy system. In iCAiET 2WZ:Inti Conj
global camera, and an end-effector mounted local camera.               AI in Eiig. & Tech., p a p s 370-375, lune 2002.
We have demonstrated that the resulting accuracy is suf-         131 L.B. lane". M.D. Jcnscn. and W.K. V&i.                Mulii modal user
                                                                       inlcraction in an aulomatic pool lrainer. In ICAU2002: IfhlEEE
ficient to pot a single ball reliably over celtain regions of          Inti. Cot$ Mtdtimodal Imeifac~r.pages 361-366. Oct. ZOUZ.
the table. The high degree of repeatability makes it likely      141 Richard Hmlcy and Andmw Zis%erman. Mrrliipie M m G m n z e ! ~in
that the system would be extremely reliable at potting in              Compuier Wdon. Cambridge Univmiiy Res$,2wO.
                                                                 IS] Z. Zhang. Flexihlc evlihralian hy viewing a plane from unknown
these regions.                                                         o&ntatians. In ICCV99: InL Coglf Comp. Ws.. pagcs 666-673.
   Our experiments also show that there are some regions               Sept. 1999.
of the table over which the gantry accuracy is insufficent       161 Samuel M. Thomas and Y.T. Chan. A simple approach for the
                                                                       eslimaiion ofeirculvr BIC C C ~ I ~and
                                                                                                           T its radius. CVGIP. 45362-370.
tu reliably pot with the given setup. One possible course              1989.
of action could be to improve the accuracy by revisiting         171 lack H. Kochler. The Science o/ Pocker Biliiordr. S@olo%y
some of our assumptions. For example, we are currently                 I'uhlicaiuns, 1989.

                                                                2525
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/rolling_carom_angle_systems.pdf
title: Rolling Carom Angle Systems
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Rolling Carom Angle Systems”                                             ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    I recently posted online video NV J.76 that demonstrates several ways to accurately predict carom
direction for rolling-CB shots. As shown in Diagram 1, the carom angle is the amount the cue ball (CB)
changes direction after colliding with the object ball (OB). Being able to predict this is useful to detect a
possible scratch, plan break-out and carom shots, and visualize position-play paths through “traffic.” Below, I
summarize all important highlights from the video.

                                          Diagram 1 Carom angle

1. 30˚ Rule Peace Sign
     If you have followed my articles over the years, you have read a lot about my 30˚ rule peace sign
technique (see Diagram 1) used to predict CB carom direction for rolling-CB shots between ¼-ball and ¾-ball
hits. If your peace sign is well calibrated, and if you know how to adjust it for different shots, you can very
accurately predict where the CB will head with a follow shot. For more information and video demonstrations,
see the 30˚ rule FAQ resource page at billiards.colostate.edu.

2. Full and Thin Hits
    For cuts fuller than a ¾-ball hit, the 3-times-the-angle system gives good results. As demonstrated in NV
J.76, you can use your cue to visualize the cut angle and copy it three times to find the predicted carom
direction. You can also approximate CB carom direction for cuts thinner than a ¼-ball hit using the 70% rule.
As also demonstrated in the video, for a thin hit, the CB heads in a direction 70% (or about ¾) of the way from
the aiming line to the tangent line.

3. Rolling Carom Angle (RCA) System
     Wouldn’t it be nice if there were a single system that could accurately predict rolling-CB carom direction
for any cut angle? Well, there is such a system. It was originally discovered in the early 1800s by the great
mathematician and physicist Coriolis. For those interested (I know most of you won’t be), online analysis TP
A.4 shows the math and physics of the system. The theoretical carom direction for a rolling CB is always

Billiards Digest                                                                                September, 2021
along a line 2/7 of the way from the tangent line to the CB aiming line. I call it the Rolling Carom Angle (RCA)
system.

    Since 2/7 is close to 1/4, fellow columnist Bob Jewett suggested you can use your cue or any known
length to help visualize this direction. As shown in Diagram 2, starting with the tip at the ghost ball (GB)
position, with the cue pointing to the pocket, parallel shift the cue along the tangent line until the butt of the
cue is aligned with the aiming line through the CB and GB position. The quarter point on the cue, which is
easy to visualize by taking half of half, will then point to the CB carom direction. In NV J.76, I show how you
can also use just the shaft length instead of the full cue to apply the system.

                                           Diagram 2 RCA System

4. CB Line RCA
     Patrick Johnson on the AZB online forum recently suggested that instead of using the cue which can
sometimes be awkward, you can just visualize a line between the CB and tangent line and find the 1/4 point
of that (see Diagram 3). I recently did an analysis (TP B.24) to determine the length proportion (instead or
2/7 or 1/4) that would yield perfect results. 2/7 is a theoretical value assuming a perfect CB-OB collision with
no energy loss or friction effects. And 1/4 is just an easy-to-visualize approximation of the theoretical value.
Based on my new analysis, the optimal length fraction is 0.281. 0.281 is between 1/4 (.25) and 1/3 (0.33) so
an improved technique is to visualize between a quarter and third of the length, which is fairly easy for most
people to do. You can also just estimate: “a little more than a quarter.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                   September, 2021
                                           Diagram 3 CB line RCA

5. Marked-Cue RCA
     An easier and more accurate approach is to mark the 0.281 point on your cue. Then you won’t need to
visualize or estimate anything. If using the full length of a standard 58″ (147 cm) cue, the 0.281 point is at
16.3″ (41 cm). This is too close to the bridging and visible part of the shaft, so it is better to mark the butt
instead. In NV J.76, I use only the butt as the reference length. If the butt is the standard 29” length, the
point should be at 8.2″ (20.7 cm). Luckily, this is right in the middle of my wrap, so I don’t really need to mark
it. As demonstrated in the video, start with the butt end at the GB and parallel shift until the other end is in
line with the CB and GB. Then a line through the point and GB gives the carom direction. The 0.281 point
works well for every cut angle from very full to very thin.

6. Perpendicular RCA
    With any of the RCA approaches, instead starting with the cue along the aiming line and shifting down the
tangent line, you can instead start with the cue along the tangent-line and shift along the line to the pocket
(see Diagram 4). This technique is also demonstrated in the video. The approach you choose is a matter of
preference, and one approach might be easier to reach and visualize than the other in different shot
situations.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   September, 2021
                                       Diagram 4 Perpendicular RCA

7. Speed Effects
     With all carom systems, it is important to account for shot speed. With faster speed, the CB persists on
the tangent line longer before curving to the predicted CB carom angle. With a slow shot, the CB curves
almost immediately and no correction is required. However, at fast speed, you need to parallel-shift the
carom angle down the tangent line more with more speed. You need to practice to develop a feel for how
much to shift at different angles and speeds, and this will vary some with cloth conditions. It is good to start
with a fast-speed ½-ball hit to see the most the carom angle will shift. Then you can use proportionally less
shifts at slower speeds. Again, at slow speed, no shift is required.

      With the cue-based RCA approaches, it can be difficult to shift the cue along the proper directions and
keep it parallel during the shifts. If you are not very careful with each step of the process, your carom
direction predictions will not be very good. That’s why I like the peace sign approach better. It is fast, easy,
and accurate (assuming your peace-sign is well calibrated, which is easy to do), and it doesn’t require any
thought, estimation, or difficult visualization. Even when the balls are far away and tough to reach, you can
still be fairly accurate using the “air peace sign” technique demonstrated in NV J.76. The other methods are
interesting theoretically, they also apply to cuts very full or very thin, and they give accurate results if used
very carefully, but I suspect most people will have trouble with them. But give all the systems a try and see
what works best for you.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                                  September, 2021
                    NV J.76 – Rolling-Cue-Ball CAROM ANGLE Systems
normal video

                    TP A.4 – Post-impact cue ball trajectory for any cut angle, speed, and spin
technical proof     TP B.24 – Estimating Rolling CB Carom Angle with 1/4 Cue Point

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   September, 2021
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/rolling_cue_ball_deflection_angle_approximations.pdf
title: Rolling Cue Ball Deflection Angle Approximations
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Rolling Cue Ball Deflection Angle Approximations”                                      ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and technical proofs (TP),
and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference
numbers used in my articles will help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or
inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details
can be found online at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

    This article summarizes some useful techniques for approximating the path a rolling cue ball (CB) will
take after striking an object ball (OB) when the hit is fairly thin or fairly thick.

     I have covered the topic of CB control in many past articles, all of which are available at
billiards.colostate.edu. In my April '04 article, I presented the 30º degree rule, which predicts that a rolling
CB will deflect by about 30º degrees (the “natural angle”) for the wide range of cut shots between a ¼-ball
and ¾-ball hit. The rule is illustrated in Diagram 1. The clear message of the diagram is that even though
the OB is being cut by very different amounts in the three shots, the CB still heads in nearly the same
direction after impact. This “natural angle” can be easily visualized at the table using your hand, as
demonstrated in NV B.66 and NV B.75. For more information, see “Dr. Dave peace-sign technique” under
“30º rule” in the FAQ section of my website.
                                                                         a rolling CB deflects
                                                                      by approximately 30º over
                                                                         a wide range of cuts

                                                                 medium                       small
                                    large                        cut angle                  cut angle
                                  cut angle
                                                    ~30º                        ~30º                      ~30º

                                         1/4                                   1/2            3/4

                    top view:

                   front view:
                    (shooter’s
                   perspective)
                                              1/4                        1/2                        3/4
                                        a) 1/4-ball hit             b) 1/2-ball hit           c) 3/4-ball hit

                                                           Diagram 1 30º rule

    Being able to predict CB direction is critical for avoiding scratches, playing position for the next shot,
avoiding obstacle balls, breaking up clusters, and aiming carom and kiss shots. For examples, see NV B.46,

Billiards Digest                                                                                                 November, 2011
NV B.68, NV B.69, and NV B.75. In addition, all CB control topics are covered and demonstrated in detail on
Disc I of the Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS), which I created recently with past BD columnist Tom
Ross.

     The 30º rule begs an obvious question: How do you predict CB direction for shots thinner than a ¼-ball
hit or thicker than a ¾-ball hit, where the rule doesn’t apply? Well, as indicated earlier, that’s the topic of this
article. In 1989, George Onoda wrote a technical article in the American Journal of Physics offering
suggestions for how to approximate CB deflection angles for different amounts of cut. His analysis assumed
perfectly elastic balls with no friction. Recently, I did an analysis to take into account the non-ideal properties
of real pool balls. If you have a math and physics background, you might be interested in checking out
Onoda’s article (which is available in the Physics Resources section of my website under “technical articles”)
and the new analysis (TP B.13). Even if you don’t want to see a bunch of math and physics, you still might
find the results interesting and useful.

     Diagram 2 illustrates one result of the analysis. For a fairly thin hit (less than a 1/4-ball hit), the angle a
rolling CB will deflect is about 70% of the angle from the original CB direction to the tangent line. The right
side of the diagram shows how the approximation is applied. You first visualize the line of the shot and the
tangent line, which is perpendicular to the desired OB direction. You then picture 70% of this total angle. The
left side of the diagram shows an easy way to visualize this 70%. Because 70% is close to ¾, bisecting the
angle twice (see the red and blue lines) provides a reasonably close approximation.

                                                                  thin hit (< 1/4-ball hit)
                         bisect the angle twice
                         to approximate 70%

                                    A
                                                           CB deflection angle =
                                                         70% of angle to tangent line          0.7A
                             0.5A                 0.7A
                                                                                     tangent          A
                                        0.25A                                          line

                                     Diagram 2 Thin hit 70% approximation

     Diagram 3 illustrates another result from TP B.13. For a fairly full hit (more than a ¾-ball hit), the angle a
rolling CB will deflect is about 2.5-times the cut angle of the shot. To apply this rule, note the cut angle of the
shot (“A” in the diagram) and then visualize two-and-1/2-times this angle (“2.5A”) on the opposite side of the
aiming line. As with the trisect system, which applies to draw shots (see NV B.67), you can use your cue or
fingers to construct this angle.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          November, 2011
                                     Diagram 3 Full hit 2.5x approximation

     Another conclusion from the analysis in TP B.13 concerns the “30º Rule.” As demonstrated in NV B.66,
for cuts closer to a ¼-ball hit and a ¾-ball hit, the angle will be slightly less than the average “natural angle;”
and for cuts closer to a ½-ball hit, the angle will be slightly more. And, if you want to be precise with CB
control, it is also important to know how to make adjustments for speed. With both follow and draw shots, the
CB persists along the tangent line longer at higher speeds before curving to the final direction, as
demonstrated in NV B.45 and HSV B.23. For more information, see “speed effects” under “30º rule” in the
FAQ section of my website.
                   NV B.45 – Cue ball path speed effects
                   NV.B.46 – Cue ball path scratch avoid, cluster break-out, and carom example
                   NV B.66 – The 30-degree rule, from VEPS I
                   NV B.67 – The trisect system for draw shots, from VEPS I
normal video       NV B.68 – Tweener cluster breaks, from VEPS I
                   NV B.69 – NV B.69 - Carom shots, from VEPS I
                   NV B.75 – 30-degree-rule natural-angle examples, from VEPS III

                   HSV B.23 – Cue ball path speed, spin, and cue elevation effects
high-speedvideo

                   TP B.13 – Cue ball deflection angle approximations
technical proof

    I hope you find the methods in this article useful in your game. Be sure to try them out the next time you
play. Next month, we’ll look at some approximations that can help in estimating CB direction for draw shots of
various amounts of cut.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                                    November, 2011
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary on my website.
      •   I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help find errors
          and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts. Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD: “High-speed
Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                November, 2011
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/rolling_motion_of_a_ball_spinning_about_a_near_vertical_axis.pdf
title: Rolling motion of a ball spinning about a near vertical axis
topics: collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
Rolling motion of a ball spinning about a near vertical axis

A ball that is projected forward without spin on a horizontal surface will slide for a short
distance before it starts rolling. Sliding friction acts to decrease the translation speed, v,
and it acts to increase the rotation speed, ω. When v = Rω, where R is the ball radius,
the ball will start rolling and the friction force drops almost to zero since the contact point
at the bottom of the ball comes to rest on the surface. The coefficient of rolling friction
is much smaller than that for sliding friction. A different situation arises if the ball is
projected forward while it is spinning about a vertical or near vertical axis. The latter
situation arises in many ball sports. It arises if a player attempts to curve a ball down
a bowling alley1 , or when a billiards player imparts sidespin or “English” to a ball2 and
it can arise in golf if a player strikes a ball with a putter at a point well away from the
middle of the putter head. The situation also arises in the game of curling3 , although in
that case the object that is projected is a cylindrical rock rather than a spherical ball, and
it arises in tennis when a ball lands on the court spinning about a vertical axis (as it does
in a slice serve).

A simple demonstration is to place a ball on a horizontal surface and spin it about a
vertical axis using the thumb of one hand and the index finger of the other hand. The
ball can be made to spin on the spot or it can be projected forward, depending on the
motion of the two hands. When I tried this by projecting a golf ball forward on low pile
carpet, I was surprised to find that (a) the spin axis remained almost vertical the whole
time without the ball rolling forward as it came to a stop, (b) the ball kept spinning
about a vertical axis after the forward motion stopped, the spin persisting for a longer
time when the initial angular velocity was increased, and (c) the ball curved to the left or
right depending on the direction of the initial spin. A literature search failed to provide
explanations, so I filmed the ball at 300 frames/sec with a Casio EX-F1 video camera to
obtain quantitative data. The data presented me with another surprise. The friction force
on the ball was quite small, the same as that for a rolling ball. The ball therefore rolled
to a stop, despite the fact that the ball kept spinning after the forward motion stopped
and despite the fact that the ball appeared visually to slide on the carpet without rolling
in the conventional manner.

Figure 1 shows the geometry of the experiment and a plausible explanation for the low

                                              1
friction force. Figure 1(a) is a bird’s–eye view of a ball spinning about a vertical axis as it
moves forward in the x direction. The ball curves to the right if it spins counter–clockwise
viewed from above, the curvature increasing with the initial spin. In practice, it is difficult
to spin a ball by hand so that the spin axis is exactly vertical. Figure 1(b) shows the spin
axis inclined at an angle θ to the horizontal, as viewed front–on with the ball approaching
the viewer. The contact point on the horizontal surface is directly below the center of
the ball, and is located a perpendicular distance r from the spin axis. The contact point
therefore rotates at speed rω away from the viewer, relative to the center of mass, while
the center of mass itself approaches the viewer at speed v. If v = rω then the contact
point is at rest on the surface. The ball can therefore roll forward along a circular path
around the ball of radius r. For example, if θ = 70◦ then r/R = cos θ = 0.34 and if θ = 80◦
then r/R = 0.17.

            y                   ω          Bird's-eye view

     (a)
                                                v
                     x
                                           Ball trajectory

                Front
                view                Spin            ω
                                    axis
            z
      (b)
                                      R
                      y
                                r

                                       Horizontal surface
                                θ

Figure 1: Geometry of a ball rolling on a horizontal surface at speed v in the x direction while the
spin axis remains nearly vertical, viewed (a) from above and (b) from the front of the approaching
ball. The z axis is vertical.

Figure 2 shows v and ω vs time for a typical case where the golf ball rolled forward over
a distance of 72 cm before rolling to a stop. Also shown is the value of θ required for
rolling for this ball (R = 22 mm). Both v and ω decreased linearly with time, but at
slightly different rates. The linear deceleration of the ball was a = 0.50 ± 0.01 m/s2 ,
giving a coefficient of friction µ = a/g = 0.051 ± 0.001. The angular deceleration, α, was
54 ± 1 rad/s2 . In separate experiments, it was found that µ = 0.044 ± 0.002 when the ball

                                                        2
rolled to a stop without initial spin, µ = 0.33 ± 0.01 when the ball was sliding (struck with
a cue stick to slide before it rolled) and α = 45 ± 1 rad/s2 for a ball spinning on the spot.
There was no significant change in deceleration rates when the ball was both spinning and
translating, indicating that the ball did indeed roll when it was given initial spin.

                        100                                                                        120
                                  Angle (rad) = -3.3 + 102.7t - 26.79t 2
 Rotation Angle (rad)

                                                                                                                   (b)

                                                                                      θ (deg)
                                                                                                   100
                        80

                                       (a)                                                         80                                θ
                        60

                                                                                       ω (rad/s)
                                                                                                   60
                        40                                                                                                    ω
 and

                                                    x (cm) = 86.3t - 25t2                          40
                                                                                                                    v

                                                                                        v (cm/s)
                        20
 x (cm)

                                                                                                   20

                         0                                                                          0
                              0              0.5               1            1.5                          0   0.5         1           1.5   2
                                                      t (s)                                                                  t (s)

Figure 2: Experimental results for a golf ball projected at an initial speed v = 86 cm/s, and with
initial spin ω = 103 rad/s. (a) Raw data showing the x coordinate of the ball at 10 cm intervals and
the rotation angle of the ball at intervals of one revolution. Quadratic fits were used to calculate v
and ω vs time, as shown in (b). θ is the calculated inclination of the spin axis needed for the ball
to roll. Note that the ball continued to spin for a short time after it stopped rolling.

The inclination of the spin axis could not be measured accurately, but the calculated value
of θ shown in Fig. 2 is consistent with observations from the video film that the spin axis
was about 20◦ away from the vertical at the start and much closer to the vertical when
v decreased to zero. Two perpendicular lines were drawn around the ball circumference
in order to measure ω accurately, but the lines did not accurately define the spin axis.
A line near the equator for the spin axis wobbles slightly if it does not coincide exactly
with the equator. A dot placed near the spin axis traces out a circular path around
the spin axis, but it is difficult to locate a dot in this manner when spinning a ball by
hand. The angular velocity of the ball is relatively easy to measure, despite the fact that
the spin axis is difficult to identify unless it is almost vertical or almost horizontal. If
the spin axis remains fixed, then the pattern of lines (and several dots) marked on the
ball re–appears in the same orientation once every revolution, even though the pattern
rotates simultaneously in vertical and horizontal directions in a manner that is difficult to

                                                                                  3
interpret. If the spin axis rotates slowly then the pattern observed on the ball also rotates
slowly every revolution.

It would seem too coincidental that the ball axis was inclined at exactly the right angle
to commence rolling at the start. Presumably there was an initial sliding phase that
quickly increased or decreased v (depending on whether the bottom of the ball was sliding
backward or forward ) so that the ball commenced rolling almost immediately. From then
on, the spin axis slowly tilted into a vertical position to maintain the rolling condition.

                                         100
                            θ (deg)

                                         80

                                                   v
                                         60
                             ω (rad/s)

                                                       θ
                                         40

                                                           ω
                              v (cm/s)

                                         20

                                          0
                                               0   0.5                 1   1.5
                                                               t (s)

Figure 3: Experimental results for a golf ball projected at an initial speed v = 83 cm/s, and with
initial spin ω = 59 rad/s. Polynomial fits to the raw data were used to calculate v and ω vs time.
θ is the calculated inclination of the spin axis needed for the ball to roll.

An additional experiment was performed where the ball was given a relatively small initial
spin about a near vertical axis, a situation that is commonly encountered in billiards and
golf and tenpin bowling. If a ball is projected with zero initial spin, then it quickly starts
rolling about a horizontal axis. If the ball is projected with a small amount of spin about
a vertical axis, then one might expect that the ball will stop spinning about its vertical
axis before it stops translating. In that case, the ball should then commence to roll about
a horizontal axis. That is essentially what happened, but the spin axis rotated with time
into a horizontal position before the ball came to a stop. Results are shown in Fig. 3 for
a golf ball projected on carpet with an initial forward speed v = 83 cm/s and an initial
angular velocity ω = 59 rad/s. In that case, v decreased at 0.49 m/s2 giving µ = 0.050,
consistent with rolling friction. The spin decreased initially at the same rate as that found

                                                       4
previously, with α = 53 rad/s2 , although the angular deceleration decreased slightly as
the ball slowed down. v and ω both decreased to zero at t = 1.62 s. The inclination of the
spin axis decreased with time to maintain the rolling condition, according to the relation
cos θ = r/R = v/(ωR), and it decreased to zero shortly before the ball came to rest. The
inclination of the spin axis shown in Fig. 3 is consistent with visual observations of the
ball from the slow motion video film.

The spin axis can therefore rotate either into a horizontal position or into a vertical
position, depending on the ratio of v to ω at the start and on the rates at which v
and ω separately decrease to zero. An analogous result is obtained with a spinning top,
although the angle of inclination of a spinning top is not as easy to calculate since the top
precesses and since the center of mass of a top is not directly above the point of support.
Nevertheless, a spinning top rights itself when spinning rapidly and it falls to a horizontal
position when spinning slowly4 . The latter process is much more complicated, and has
therefore received much more attention than the motion of a humble spherical ball. The
question as to whether a disk or coin slides or rolls when it precesses is discussed in Ref. 5.

References

1 C. Frohlich, “What makes bowling balls hook?,” Am.          J. Phys. 72, 1170-1177 (Sept.
2004).

2 S. Mathaven, M. Jackson and R. Parkin, “Application of high–speed imaging to deter-

mine the dynamics of billiards,” Am. J. Phys. 77, 788–794 (Sept. 2009).

3 A.R. Penner, “The physics of sliding cylinders and curling rocks”, Am.         J. Phys. 69,
332-339 (March 2001).

4 D. Parkyn, “The rising of tops with rounded pegs, Physica”, 24, 313–330 (1958).

5 D. Petrie, J. Hunt and C. Gray, “Does the Euler disk slip during its motion?”, Am. J.

Phys. 70, 1025–1028 (Oct. 2002).

                                              5
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/rules_part_i_introduction.pdf
title: Rules Part I Introduction
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                                 ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Rules - Part I: introduction”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the first article in a series on pool rules. Recently, fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett
and I spent a weekend filming hundreds of shots, with both regular and high-speed video
cameras, for a rules quiz. I also created some instructional videos and posted them online along
with the quiz. Bob has been very active over the years serving on rules committees, playing a
lead role as a rules author, and training referees. The purpose of the quiz and other online
videos is to help people (players and referees) evaluate and improve their level of understanding
of the official rules of pool, and to get better at applying the rules in various game situations.

     NV B.61 contains the rules quiz video. The quiz consists of 100 different shots. Your job is
to judge each shot as “fair” or “foul.” There are slight differences in rules from one league and
tournament to the next, but most rule sets follow fairly closely the official and internationally-
recognized World Standardized Rules published by the World Pool-Billiards Association (WPA).
The complete rules can be viewed online at www.wpa-pool.com. You should judge each quiz
shot according to the official WPA rules. There are many types of fouls, but the ones focused on
in the quiz video are:
     •    not contacting a rail after the cue ball (CB) hits the object ball (OB)
     •    hitting the wrong ball with the CB first
     •    double hitting the CB
     •    pushing the CB with the cue
     •    touching balls
     •    9-ball push-out violations
     •    illegal “scoop” jump shots

If you are not familiar with the rules concerning these types of fouls, you might want to visit the
WPA site and study up a little before attempting the quiz.

     I hope you will want to try out the quiz to test how well you know the rules. If so, follow the
following steps:

          1. Print a copy of the quiz scoring sheet. Links to all of the resources and videos cited
             in this article can be found in the “Instructor and Student Resources” section of my
             website (billiards.colostate.edu) under “references and rules – referee quiz.”

          2. View the still image before each shot showing the shot number and any specific
             information not obvious in the image (e.g., whether or not balls are frozen). The still
             image remains on the screen for a few seconds, but you can also press the pause
             button to give yourself more time to study the shot layout.

Billiards Digest                                                                         August, 2009
               3. Watch the video clip of the shot. Press the pause button after the clip, and record
                  your ruling (“fair” or “foul”) on the scoring sheet. If you need to, rewind the video to
                  review a shot if you think you missed something, but try to limit how much you do
                  this. If you have any uncertainty about the shot, or if you think you had to make any
                  assumptions to make your ruling, record comments on the answer sheet.

               4. Do steps 2 and 3 for all 100 shots in the quiz.

               5. Check all of your answers against the rulings on the quiz answer sheet. You can
                  also view all of the answers and brief explanations in NV B.62. You can be lenient
                  with yourself on the shots marked “TOUGH CALL” on the answer sheet, provided you
                  understood the issues involved with the shot, and your comments (on your answer
                  sheet) addressed any uncertainty.

I recommend you go online now and take the quiz, before reading the remainder of this article.
That way you will get a good measure of your current understanding of the rules. Be a “good
student” and don’t cheat by looking at the answer sheet or video before you finish your scoring
sheet.
                       NV B.61 – Pool rules quiz for referees and players, with Bob Jewett
                       NV B.62 – Answers to pool rules quiz for referees and players
normal video           NV B.63 – Instruction for pool rules quiz

    Your score is out of 100 (just like in school). If you are an experienced referee, your score
should be close to 100. If you are not very familiar with the official rules of pool, you might do
quite poorly (e.g., 50-70). I recently announced the quiz on the BD-CCB and AZB online forums,
and about 20 people shared their scores. The high was 97 (from an experienced referee), the
low was 70, and the average was 83. I honestly don’t know how “representative” this range is
because we don’t know much about the people who were willing to share the scores, but the
range is about what Bob and I expected (although, we would expect lower scores from people
who might not be very “rules-savvy.”)

     If you did poorly in the quiz, you might want to view the instructional videos in NV B.63. They
provide useful information and advice on how to interpret and apply the rules in different game
situations. Then you can try the quiz again to see how you improve. NV B.63 contains
instructional segments for each of the following situations:
     •         part 1: CB frozen to the OB
     •         part 2: small gap between the CB and OB
     •         part 3: rail cut shots
     •         part 4: balls frozen to rails
     •         part 5: determining which ball is hit first
     •         part 6: miscellaneous fouls

    In future articles, we will look at examples from all of these categories. Here, I want to cover
two types of shots that won’t be covered in future months: kiss-back shots and shots where both
the CB and OB are frozen to a rail. To judge these types of shots, you must have a good
understanding of WPA Rules 6.3 and 8.4:

     6.3 No Rail after Contact
         If no ball is pocketed on a shot, the cue ball must contact an object ball, and after that
         contact at least one ball (cue ball or any object ball) must be driven to a rail, or the shot is
         a foul.

Billiards Digest                                                                               August, 2009
     8.4 Driven to a Rail
         A ball is said to be driven to a rail if it is not touching that rail and then touches that rail. A
         ball touching at the start of a shot (said to be “frozen” to the rail) is not considered driven
         to that rail unless it leaves the rail and returns. A ball that is pocketed or driven off the
         table is also considered to have been driven to a rail. A ball is assumed not to be frozen
         to any rail unless it is declared frozen by the referee, the shooter, or the opponent.

     Diagram 1 shows several kiss-back shot examples. These types of shots can be used in
safety play, where there are nearby balls to serve as blockers, or where you want to create
distance between the balls and leave one or both of them close to rails. The quiz shot numbers
appear in the diagram. Shots “5” (the 1-ball shot) and “26” (the 3-ball shot) are fouls because
neither the CB nor the OB makes new contact with a rail after ball contact. Shots “19” (the 2-ball
shot) and “33” (the 4-ball shot) are fair because the CB is driven to a rail after ball contact. As is
clear in WPA Rule 8.4, an OB frozen to a rail before (and during) ball contact does not count as
“rail contact.” Something must be “driven to a rail” after OB contact.

                              1               2                                     3

                                                               shot “26”   3
                          1
                                         2                       (foul)

                   shot “5”       shot “19”
                    (foul)          (fair)

                                                               shot “33”
                                                                 (fair)
                                                                                         4

                                                                               4

                                  Diagram 1 Kiss-back shot examples

     Diagram 2 shows two examples where both the CB and OB are frozen to the rail. In shot “6”
(the 1-ball shot), the CB is hit parallel to the rail, and the CB hugs the rail on the way to the 1-ball.
However, the CB drifts away slightly and returns to the rail (due to the “pull” of the rail “groove” or
“gutter”) as it approaches the side pocket, resulting in “new contact” with the rail. The 1-ball also
hugs the rail on the way to the side pocket but drifts away slightly in the pocket opening and
doesn’t contact the rail on the other side of the pocket. Because the CB made new contact with
the rail after ball contact, the shot is fair. If the CB had remained along the rail (didn’t leave and
come back), this shot would have been a foul. If the CB had remained along the rail, and the 1-
ball had been driven to the rail on the other side of the side pocket, the shot would have been fair
because the 1-ball would have made new rail contact. Some people think a ball must be driven
to a new rail after contact, and the same rail (on either side of the side pocket) would not count,
but this is not the case with the current official WPA rules. In shot “34” (the 2-ball shot), the CB
leaves the rail slightly and hits the 2-ball at a small angle, deflecting the 2-ball away from the rail.
Nothing (neither the CB nor the 2-ball) makes new contact with a rail after ball contact, so this
shot is a foul.

Billiards Digest                                                                                August, 2009
                                         1                   1   1        1

                       shot “6” (fair)
                                                                     the OB drifts away
                                                                     from the rail at the
                                             the CB leaves and         pocket opening
                                              returns to the rail

                                                                              shot “34” (foul)

                                                     2
                                                                          2

                                 Diagram 2 Rail-frozen ball examples

     Differences between fair and foul shots like the ones in Diagrams 1 and 2 can sometimes be
very subtle, and might seem a little “nit-picky” at times, but the rules must be clear on what is fair
or foul in every situation; otherwise, the rules could not be applied in a reasonable and consistent
way. You can view demonstrations of all of the shots in Diagrams 1 and 2 (and several more
similar shots) in “part 4” of NV B.63. The video includes the appropriate ruling and an
explanation for each shot.

    Well, I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles dealing with pool rules. Please
encourage all of your pool-playing friends, teammates, and league members to take the quiz and
view the instructional videos online. If people had a better understanding of all of the rules and
how they are applied, maybe there would be fewer “differences of opinion” and “heated debates”
during league night. Next month, we will look at several examples of push shots and double hits,
and discuss how to detect and prevent them.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   If you want to refer to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access them
          online at billiards.colostate.edu.
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, impact
          line, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
          come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
          glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                 August, 2009
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/rules_part_ii_double_hits.pdf
title: Rules - Part II: double hits
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Rules - Part II: double hits”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the second article in a series on pool rules. The series features shots from a pool
rules quiz I recently created with fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett. The quiz can be viewed online
in NV B.61. NV B.62 provides answers and brief explanations for each shot. NV B.63 provides
thorough instruction in each foul category. All calls in the quiz and this article series are based on
the internationally-recognized World Standardized Rules published by the World Pool-Billiards
Association (WPA). The complete rules can be viewed online at www.wpa-pool.com. Last
month, I introduced the quiz and supporting resources and looked at examples of kiss-back and
rail-frozen shots. This month, we will look at shots where there is a small gap between the cue
ball (CB) and object ball (OB), and also where the CB is frozen to the OB.
                   NV B.61 – Pool rules quiz for referees and players, with Bob Jewett
                   NV B.62 – Answers to pool rules quiz for referees and players
normal video       NV B.63 – Instruction for pool rules quiz

     Here are the pertinent WPA rules concerning small-gap and frozen-ball shots:

     6.7 Double Hit / Frozen Balls
         If the cue stick contacts the cue ball more than once on a shot, the shot is a foul. If the
         cue ball is close to but not touching an object ball and the cue tip is still on the cue ball
         when the cue ball contacts that object ball, the shot is a foul. If the cue ball is very close
         to an object ball, and the shooter barely grazes that object ball on the shot, the shot is
         assumed not to violate the first paragraph of this rule, even though the tip is arguably still
         on the cue ball when ball-ball contact is made.
         However, if the cue ball is touching an object ball at the start of the shot, it is legal to
         shoot towards or partly into that ball (provided it is a legal target within the rules of the
         game) and if the object ball is moved by such a shot, it is considered to have been
         contacted by the cue ball. (Even though it may be legal to shoot towards such a touching
         or “frozen” ball, care must be taken not to violate the rules in the first paragraph if there
         are additional balls close by.)
         The cue ball is assumed not to be touching any ball unless it is declared touching by the
         referee or opponent. It is the shooter’s responsibility to get the declaration before the
         shot. Playing away from a frozen ball does not constitute having hit that ball unless
         specified in the rules of the game.

     6.8 Push Shot
         It is a foul to prolong tip-to-cue-ball contact beyond that seen in normal shots.

    Diagram 1 has some still images from NV B.63 (part 1) showing a cut shot where the CB is
frozen to the OB (before the shot). The still images don’t do the video justice, so try to view the
video online when you get a chance. You can clearly see in the video and diagram that the CB
cleanly and quickly separates from the cue tip, as with a normal shot. There is no double hit or
push. Therefore, it makes sense to allow this type of shot, as is the case with the WPA rules

Billiards Digest                                                                         September, 2009
(although, I never liked that this type of shot is allowed in pool, because the shot still feels and
looks like a “push,” even if it isn’t). Diagram 1a illustrates some important terminology. The line
of centers passes through the centers of the CB and OB at impact, and the tangent line is
perpendicular to the line of centers. With a typical cut shot, where the CB is not frozen to the OB
initially, the CB immediately heads in the tangent-line direction after impact with the OB. This is
called the 90° rule. However, when the CB is frozen to the OB, the CB does not head in the
tangent-line direction (see the black line relative to the yellow line in Diagram 1e). In fact, there is
a useful CB aiming system for frozen-CB cut shots (see NV B.55). There are also interesting
ways to control CB travel distance with straight-on frozen-CB shots (see NV B.48).

                          Diagram 1 Frozen CB shot in super slow motion

                   NV B.55 – Bob Jewett's two-times-fuller frozen-cue-ball aiming system
normal video
                   NV B.48 – Frozen cue ball position control options

    Diagram 2 shows examples of shots with a small gap between the CB and OB. The quiz
shot numbers appear in the diagram. When trying to judge whether or not a small-gap shot is a
double hit or not, it is important to understand the tangent line and the expected motion of the CB.
With a single-hit cut shot, the CB should head in the tangent line direction immediately after
impact with the OB (see shots 16, 30, 36, 74, and 93 in part 2 of NV B.63 – part 2). If the CB
heads away from the tangent line almost immediately after hitting the OB, then there must have
been a double hit, and the shot is a foul (see shots 17, 72, 90, and 100 in part 2 of NV B.63). In
Diagram 2, shot “16” (the 1-ball shot) is clearly fair because the CB heads exactly along the
tangent-line direction, perpendicular to the OB’s motion. Shot “100” (the 2-ball shot) is a foul
because the CB moves forward of the tangent line, indicating a double hit. Shot “69” (the 3-ball
shot) is a foul because the CB follows forward immediately off the tip, showing no hesitation.
With a single hit of the tip, the CB would lose all of its forward speed after striking the 3-ball (as
with a stop shot), and only then gradually accelerate forward as a result of the topspin. Shot “45”
(the 4-ball shot) is also a double-hit foul. With a single hit below center, the CB would stop in
place or draw back. Instead, the CB is driven forward before stopping. This can happen only
with a second strike of the tip. As with many of the shots in this series, you can’t usually see the
actual foul directly (e.g., a small-gap double-hit is usually too fast to see or hear), but the foul is
obvious indirectly by observing the motion of the CB.

Billiards Digest                                                                         September, 2009
                                                              3
                              shot “16”
                                (fair)                       CB follows forward             shot “69”
                                              1              without hesitation               (foul)

                         shot “100”           tangent
                           (foul)               line
                                                                      shot “45”             elevated cue
                                                                        (foul)
                                                  2
                                                                                        4
                                                                      CB comes to stop near
                                                                      original 4-ball location

                              Diagram 2 Small gap between the CB and OB

     Diagram 3 shows two shot examples where the CB and OB are frozen. Both shots are fair
because the CB is hit with a normal stroke and there is no double hit. The CB does head forward
of the tangent line in both cases, but this is to be expected with a frozen-CB shot. Compare shot
“1” in Diagram 3 with shot “100” in Diagram 2. The shots are nearly identical, yet one is a foul
and one isn’t, based solely on whether or not the balls are frozen. If there is a fraction of a
millimeter gap between the balls, the shot is a foul. If there is no gap, the shot is fair. I personally
don’t like this distinction; but the rules are the rules, and we must comply.

                                fast
                                medium
                                                                                                 fast
                                slow
                                                                                                 medium
                                              1
                                                                                                 slow

                   shot “1”
                    (fair)                  tangent
                                              line

                                                                  2

                                                                                   shot “29”
                                                                                     (fair)

                                          Diagram 3 CB and OB frozen

Billiards Digest                                                                                          September, 2009
     You can view demonstrations of all of the shots in Diagrams 1 and 2 (and many other related
shots) in parts 1 and 2 of NV B.63. The video includes the appropriate ruling (fair or foul) and the
reason behind each ruling. For more advice and instruction on how to detect double hits with
various types of shots, see HSV B.6 and NV B.2. My “High-speed Video Magic” DVD also covers
this topic in detail. For some interesting techniques to prevent double hits, where cue elevation
and/or large cut angle are not desirable or possible, see NV B.49, NV B.50, NV B.51, and NV
B.52.
                      NV B.2 – Mike Page's double hits, push shots, and frozen balls
                      NV B.49 - Using your knuckles to prevent a double hit and stop the cue ball, with
                      Bob Jewett
                      NV B.50 - Using your knuckles to prevent a double hit and get follow, with Bob
normal video          Jewett
                      NV B.51 - Using your natural forward stroke limit to prevent a double hit and get
                      draw, with Bob Jewett
                      NV B.52 - Using a fouette shot to prevent a double hit, with Bob Jewett

                      HSV B.6 – double hit detection and avoidance
high-speed video

    Well, I hope you are enjoying and benefiting from my series of articles dealing with pool rules.
Please encourage all of your pool-playing friends, teammates, and league members to take the
quiz and view the instructional videos online. If people had a better understanding of all of the
rules and how they are applied, maybe there would be fewer “differences of opinion” and “heated
debates” during league night. Next month, we will look at several examples of rail cut shots,
where the OB is close or frozen to a rail.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        If you want to refer to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access them
               online at billiards.colostate.edu.
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, impact
               line, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
               come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
               glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                             September, 2009
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/rules_part_iii_rail_cut_shots.pdf
title: Rules - Part III: rail cut shots
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                                  ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Rules - Part III: rail cut shots”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

    This is the third article in a series on pool rules. The series features shots from a pool rules
quiz I recently created with fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett. The quiz can be viewed online in NV
B.61. Also, NV B.62 provides answers and brief explanations for each shot, and NV B.63
provides thorough instruction in each foul category. All calls in the quiz and this series of articles
are based on the internationally-recognized World Standardized Rules published by the World
Pool-Billiards Association (WPA). The complete set of rules can be viewed online at www.wpa-
pool.com. Last month, we looked at shots where there is a small gap between the cue ball (CB)
and object ball (OB), and also where the CB is frozen to the OB. This month, we will look at rail
cut shots, where the OB is either close to or frozen to a rail.
                   NV B.61 – Pool rules quiz for referees and players, with Bob Jewett
                   NV B.62 – Answers to pool rules quiz for referees and players
normal video       NV B.63 – Instruction for pool rules quiz

     Here are the pertinent WPA rule excerpts concerning rail cut shots:

     6.3 No Rail after Contact
         If no ball is pocketed on a shot, the cue ball must contact an object ball, and after that
         contact at least one ball (cue ball or any object ball) must be driven to a rail, or the shot is
         a foul.

     6.7 Double Hit
         If the cue stick contacts the cue ball more than once on a shot, the shot is a foul. If the
         cue ball is close to but not touching an object ball and the cue tip is still on the cue ball
         when the cue ball contacts that object ball, the shot is a foul.

     8.4 Driven to a Rail
         A ball is said to be driven to a rail if it is not touching that rail and then touches that rail. A
         ball touching at the start of a shot (said to be “frozen” to the rail) is not considered driven
         to that rail unless it leaves the rail and returns.

      Diagram 1 shows examples of rail cut shots with and without English and a double hit. The
shot numbers in the diagram are from the quiz. As was covered in detail last month, the key to
detecting a double hit is visualizing the tangent line for the shot. With a legal hit, the CB will head
initially along this line. For example, in shot “4” (the 1-ball shot), the CB heads and persists along
the tangent line. This is the result of a single-hit stun shot with no English. With shot “25” (the 2-
ball shot), the CB heads well forward of the tangent line. Because no English is used, the CB
motion can be explained only by a double hit. The cue tip hits the CB a second time during the
follow-through, after the CB hits the 2-ball, causing the CB to deflect away as shown. This shot is
a foul. With shots like this, where the balls are close to each other and the rail, it is nearly
impossible to see or hear the double hit directly. The only way to determine whether or not the
shot is a foul is to watch the motion of the CB.

Billiards Digest                                                                               October, 2009
                              1                                               3
                                            shot “4”         shot “18”
                                             (fair)            (fair)

                                  tangent
                                    line

                     double             shot “25”            shot “77”
                       hit                (foul)               (fair)
                              2                                               4

                   Diagram 1 Rail cut shots with and without English and a double hit

     With shot “18” (the 3-ball shot), left (outside or reverse) English is used to make the CB
deflect off the cushion up table; and in shot “77” (the 4-ball shot), left (inside or running) English is
used to redirect the CB down table. In both of these shots, the CB initially deflects off the OB in
the tangent-line direction. The English then “takes” when the CB hits the rail. Without knowing
what type of English is applied, shot “77” might look like a double hit because the CB motion is
almost indistinguishable from that in shot “25,” but this shot is not a foul. A single hit, and the
inside English, results in the expected CB motion, so shot “77” is fair. See part 3 of NV B.63 for
more explanation and many more examples of both legal and illegal hits.

      Diagram 2 shows two examples where the OB is frozen to the rail before the shot. WPA
rules 6.3 and 8.4 must understood and applied carefully with these types of shots. Something
(the CB or OB) must hit a rail (or the OB must be pocketed) after OB contact for the shot to be
fair. With frozen rail cut shots, it is very important to know whether or not the CB hits the rail first
(before hitting the OB). In shot “61” (the 1-ball shot), the rail-first hit is easy to see in slow-motion
video playback. Unfortunately, instant replay is not available to help officiate pool matches.
Instead, we must judge the hit by how the CB moves. With a rail-first hit, the CB would head
initially in the tangent line direction, regardless of the spin on the CB. In shot “61,” because of the
slow speed, the CB heads forward of the tangent line almost immediately due to follow. In this
case, it can be difficult to judge the rail-first hit (because similar motion would result from ball-first
contact with running English), but this shot is a foul. Shot 66 (the 2-ball shot) shows how a ball-
first hit reacts. The running English “takes” after ball contact; and with the follow action, the CB
heads closer to the rail than it does with a rail-first hit. Shot 66 is not a foul because the CB hits
the rail after OB contact.

Billiards Digest                                                                             October, 2009
                       1                                                                         2

                                     shot “61”                               shot “66”
                                       (foul)                                  (fair)

                   1                  rail first                              ball first             2

                                             fast                                   fast
                                             medium                                 medium
                                             slow                                   slow

                                Diagram 2 Frozen rail cut shot hitting rail or ball first

     You can view demonstrations and explanations of all of the shots in Diagrams 1 and 2 (and
many other related shots) in parts 3 and 4 of NV B.63. The video includes the appropriate ruling
(fair or foul) and the reason behind each ruling. With rail cut shots, you have tremendous control
over the path of the CB. A wide range of examples can be viewed in HSV A.128-A.141. My
High-Speed Video Magic DVD also has a feature on this topic.
                           HSV A.128 – Rail cut-shot hitting the ball first, with fast speed, slight draw,
                           outside English
                           HSV A.129 – Rail cut-shot hitting the ball first early with OE
                           HSV A.130 – Rail cut-shot hitting the ball first, with more-than-gearing outside
                           English
                           HSV A.131 – Rail cut-shot hitting the ball first, with less-than-gearing outside
                           English
                           HSV A.132 – Rail cut-shot hitting the rail first, with natural (running) English
                           HSV A.133 – Rail cut-shot hitting the rail first a little early, faster, with natural
                           (running) English
                           HSV A.134 – Rail cut-shot hitting the rail first, hitting the ball while compressing,
                           with stun and no English
                           HSV A.135 – Rail cut-shot hitting the rail first, hitting the ball during rebound,
high-speed video           fast, with slight natural (running) English
                           HSV A.136 – Rail cut-shot hitting the rail first, hitting the ball at maximum
                           compression, very fast, with slight natural (running) English
                           HSV A.137 – Rail cut-shot hitting the rail first, hitting the ball while compressing,
                           fast, with draw and natural (running) English
                           HSV A.138 – Rail cut-shot hitting the rail first, hitting the ball at maximum
                           compression, with lots of natural (running) English
                           HSV A.139 – Rail cut-shot hitting the rail first, hitting the ball while compressing,
                           with natural (running) English
                           HSV A.140 – Rail cut-shot hitting the rail first (barely), hitting the ball during
                           initial compression, with lots of natural (running) English
                           HSV A.141 – Rail cut-shot hitting the rail first (barely), hitting the ball during
                           initial compression, slower, with stun and lots of natural (running) English

Billiards Digest                                                                                         October, 2009
    Well, I hope you are enjoying and benefiting from my series of articles dealing with pool rules.
Please encourage all of your pool-playing friends, teammates, and league members to take the
quiz and view the instructional videos online. If people had a better understanding of all of the
rules and how they are applied, maybe there would be fewer “differences of opinion” and “heated
debates” during league night. Next month, we will look at several examples of how you
determine whether or not an OB is hit first when an obstacle-ball is near.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   If you want to refer to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access them
          online at billiards.colostate.edu.
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, impact
          line, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
          come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
          glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                           October, 2009
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/rules_part_iv_which_ball_did_you_hit_first.pdf
title: Rules - Part IV: Which ball did you hit first?
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                                ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Rules - Part IV: Which ball did you hit first?”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the fourth article in a series on pool rules. The series features shots from a pool rules
quiz I recently created with fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett. The quiz can be viewed online in NV
B.61. In addition, NV B.62 provides answers and brief explanations for each shot, while NV B.63
provides a more thorough instruction in each foul category. All calls in the quiz and this series of
articles are based on the internationally-recognized World Standardized Rules published by the
World Pool-Billiards Association (WPA). The complete set of rules can be viewed online at
www.wpa-pool.com. Last month, we looked at rail cut shots, where the object ball is either
close to or frozen to a rail. This month, we will look at cases where it is not clear whether or not
the cue ball (CB) hits the desired object ball (OB) first.
                   NV B.61 – Pool rules quiz for referees and players, with Bob Jewett
                   NV B.62 – Answers to pool rules quiz for referees and players
normal video       NV B.63 – Instruction for pool rules quiz

     Here is the pertinent WPA rule concerning contacting the correct ball first:

     6.2 Wrong Ball First
         In those games which require the first object ball struck to be a particular ball or one of a
         group of balls, it is a foul for the cue ball to first contact any other ball.

     Diagram 1 shows an example where a violation of Rule 6.2 might easily be missed by an
uninformed player. The shot numbers in the diagram correspond with those in the quiz video. In
Diagram 1, the 3-ball blocks the direct path for the CB to pocket the 2-ball, so the rail must be
struck first. With a shot like this, with the 2-ball and 3-ball fairly close together, it can be very
difficult to see directly whether or not the CB hits the 2-ball or the 3-ball first off the rail. The key
to detecting which ball is hit first is to understand how the CB should react. If the CB deflects off
the 2-ball first, it will then deflect off the 3-ball in the 3-ball tangent-line direction (see Diagram
1a). However, if the CB hits the 3-ball first, the CB will then deflect off the 2-ball along the 2-ball
tangent line (see Diagram 1b). Shot “54” (Diagram 1a) is fair because the CB obviously hits the
2-ball first, as required. With shot “48” in the quiz video (in part 5 of NV B.63), the CB actually
heads slightly forward of the 2-ball tangent-line direction immediately because the CB hops
slightly and hits the 2-ball above its equator (see HSV B.37 for exaggerated examples of this
effect). And the topspin follow action takes the CB even farther forward. But because the CB
heads much closer to the expected 2-ball tangent line than the expected 3-ball tangent line, the
shot is obviously a foul, because the wrong ball was hit first.

Billiards Digest                                                                          November, 2009
                                                                      2-ball
                                                                     tangent
                                                                       line

                    3-ball
                   tangent
                     line

                                 3                                                     3
                             2                                                 2

                   a) shot “54” (fair)                            b) shot “48” (foul)

                                         Diagram 1 Rail-first shot on 2-ball

                    HSV B.37 –jump shot over-cut effect and examples
high-speed video

     Diagram 2 shows another “Which ball was hit first?” example where two balls are very close
together. In this shot, the 8-ball must be hit first for the shot to be legal (e.g., if you’re playing 9-
ball, or 8-ball and shooting “solids”). Unfortunately, to make this shot, the CB will be very close to
(nearly touching) the 9-ball when it hits the 8-ball. As with the shot in Diagram 1, it is extremely
difficult (if not impossible) to see directly which ball is hit first. But as before, if we understand
tangent lines and the expected motion of the CB, we can determine whether or not the shot is a
foul. With shot “7” (see Diagram 2a) the CB clearly leaves along the 9-ball tangent line, before
the path curves slightly due to the draw. Shot “21” (see Diagram 2b) is the same as shot “7,” but
here a foul is committed because the 9-ball is hit first. There is no doubt about this because the
CB leaves in the 8-ball tangent-line direction. Isn’t it amazing how much difference a fraction of a
millimeter can make in a shot like this? Not only does the CB head in a radically different
direction, the tiny difference in aim causes you to lose a game you would otherwise be on the
verge of winning! Good luck trying to argue your way out of this one with a knowledgeable
opponent (if you hit the wrong ball first). The physics is very clear in this example, provided you
understand it.

                                                                    8-ball
                                                                   tangent
                                             8                       line          8
                                                 9                                     9

                                                      9-ball
                                                     tangent
                                                       line

                                     a) shot “7” (fair)                b) shot “21”(foul)

                                     Diagram 2 8-ball shot with nearby 9-ball

Billiards Digest                                                                            November, 2009
     You can view demonstrations and explanations of all of the shots in Diagrams 1 and 2 (and
many other related shots) in part 5 of NV B.63. The video includes the appropriate ruling (fair or
foul) and the reason behind each ruling. Be sure to watch the videos online. The super-slow-
motion clips included really help visually reinforce the topics and examples covered in this article.

    Well, I hope you are enjoying and benefiting from my series of articles dealing with pool rules.
Please encourage all of your pool-playing friends, teammates, and league members to take the
quiz and view the instructional videos online. If people had a better understanding of all of the
rules and how they are applied, maybe there would be fewer “differences of opinion” and “heated
debates” during league night. Next month, we will look at several other miscellaneous fouls not
covered in my previous articles.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   If you want to refer to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access them
          online at billiards.colostate.edu.
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, impact
          line, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
          come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
          glossary on my website.
      •   I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help
          find errors and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts.
          Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                         November, 2009
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/rules_part_v_miscellaneous_fouls.pdf
title: Rules - Part V: Miscellaneous fouls
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Rules - Part V: Miscellaneous fouls”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

    This is the fifth and final article in this series on pool rules, which features shots from a pool
rules quiz I recently created with fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett. The quiz can be viewed online
in NV B.61. In addition, NV B.62 provides answers and brief explanations for each shot, while
NV B.63 provides a more thorough instruction in each foul category. All calls in the quiz and this
series of articles are based on the internationally-recognized World Standardized Rules
published by the World Pool-Billiards Association (WPA). The complete set of rules can be
viewed online at www.wpa-pool.com. In the first four articles, we’ve looked at fouls involving not
contacting a rail after the cue ball (CB) hits the object ball (OB), hitting the wrong ball first, and
double-hitting and/or pushing the CB. This month, we look at a few miscellaneous fouls not
covered in previous articles.
                   NV B.61 – Pool rules quiz for referees and players, with Bob Jewett
                   NV B.62 – Answers to pool rules quiz for referees and players
normal video       NV B.63 – Instruction for pool rules quiz

     Here are excerpts from the pertinent WPA rules concerning the shots in this article:

     6.2 Wrong Ball First
         In those games which require the first object ball struck to be a particular ball or one of a
         group of balls, it is a foul for the cue ball to first contact any other ball.

     6.6 Touched Ball
         It is a foul to touch, move or change the path of any object ball except by the normal ball-
         to-ball contacts during shots.

     6.7 Double Hit / Frozen Balls
         If the cue stick contacts the cue ball more than once on a shot, the shot is a foul.

     6.16 Unsportsmanlike Conduct
         ... the referee may impose a penalty depending on his judgment of the conduct. ...
         Unsportsmanlike conduct ... includes:
         (c) playing a shot by intentionally miscuing;

     8.16 Jump Shot
         A jump shot is one in which the cue ball is made to go over an intervening obstacle such
         as an object ball or part of the cushion. Whether such a shot is legal depends on how it is
         accomplished and the intention of the shooter. Usually a legal jump shot is played by
         elevating the cue stick and driving the cue ball down into the playing surface from which it
         rebounds.

Billiards Digest                                                                         December, 2009
     8.18 Miscue
         A miscue occurs when the cue tip slides off the cue ball possibly due to a contact that is
         too eccentric or to insufficient chalk on the tip. Although some miscues involve contact of
         the side of the cue stick with the cue ball, unless such contact is clearly visible, it is
         assumed not to have occurred. A scoop shot, in which the cue tip contacts the playing
         surface and the cue ball at the same time and this causes the cue ball to rise off the
         cloth, is treated like a miscue.

     Diagram 1 shows example where an obstacle ball is bumped accidentally with the cue or
bridge hand during a shot. The standard rule in this situation is “all-ball fouls” (see WPA Rule
6.6). In this case, you are not allowed to come in contact with any ball before, during, or after a
shot. The only exception is the cue tip hitting the CB during a single-hit, legal stroke. A common
variation on this rule in many tournaments and leagues is called “CB fouls only.” In this case, the
illegal contact applies only to the CB. An exception is when any touched or moved ball affects
the shot by directly or indirectly changing the path of any ball in motion, in which case the
unintentional contact is a foul. In shot 10 (the 1-ball shot in Diagram 1), the bridge hand
unintentionally touches and moves the 4-ball during the shot. If playing under “all-ball fouls,” this
would, by definition, be a foul. But if playing under “CB fouls only,” this shot would be fair,
because the 4-ball never comes into play (i.e., it doesn’t any moving ball). Your opponent has the
option to reposition any unintentionally moved balls to their original locations, but there is no foul.
In shot 65, however, the CB hits the 5-ball after the 5-ball is unintentionally moved during the
shot. So even if you are playing under “CB fouls only,” this shot would be a foul, because the 5-
ball affects the CB’s motion.

                               1                                                 2

                   shot “10”                                                         shot “65”
                     (fair)                                                 55
                                                                                       (foul)
                                       4
                                   4

                        ball moved                           CB hits ball
                     accidentally with                       accidentally
                       bridge hand                             moved

                                           Diagram 1 Accidentally touched ball

     Diagram 2 shows two “scoop” shots, where the CB is jumped over a ball by either hitting very
low on the ball, or as the result of a miscue. In shot 12 (the 2-ball shot), the game is 9-ball, so we
must contact the 2-ball first (per WPA Rule 6.2). Here, a “scoop” shot is being employed to jump
over the 3-ball. Per WPA rules 8.16 and 8.18, this is a foul. In fact, because of the obvious intent
is to scoop the CB, the foul could be ruled as unsportsmanlike conduct as well (per WPA Rules
6.16 and 8.18). This can result in a stiffer penalty than an ordinary foul, per the discretion of the
referee. As shown in the super-slow-motion clips in NV B.63-part 6 (see also: HSV B.2), a scoop
shot doesn’t always involve a miscue or double hit. If the cue tip slides along the cloth and/or hits

Billiards Digest                                                                                 December, 2009
the CB and table at the same time, the CB is launched into the air with a single non-miscue hit
from the tip. Nevertheless, an intentional scoop is still a foul.

                       2
                                              3
                                                                                            shot “12”
                                      intentional “scoop”                                     (foul)
                                          jump shot

                                                        unintentional miscue “scoop” shot,
                                                  with the CB hitting the 1-ball before clearing it
                     shot “82”
                       (fair)                                     1
                                                                            1                           9

                                     Diagram 2 “Scoop” shots

                   HSV B.2 – Illegal "scoop" jump shots
high-speed video

    Shot 82 (the 1-ball shot) in Diagram 2 shows an unintentional scoop. In this example, there
is no reason to believe a player intended to jump over the 1-ball, because the 1-ball-9-ball
combination is the obvious (and easiest) option, resulting in a win. Also, if you entirely clear the
1-ball, the shot is a foul because the 9-ball would then be contacted first (per WPA Rule 6.2).
Therefore, any scoop here is probably unintentional and would not be ruled as a foul ... provided
the CB touches the 1-ball while airborne.

     Diagram 3 shows a shot where a miscue results in a foul whether or not the miscue was
intentional or not. The 1-ball is frozen to the rail and the CB is frozen to the 1-ball. There is no
reasonable legal shot on the 1-ball, but the CB can be kissed off the 1-ball with right English for
the billiard shot on the 9-ball for the win, as per the blue path in the diagram (see HSV B.28).
However, the billiard shot isn’t easy; and if you miss, you will likely lose the game. Here, a
knowledgeable and devious player might decide to intentionally miscue, hoping the opponent or
referee might judge the miscue as unintentional, and therefore not a foul. Most miscues do
involve double hits (see HSV B.36), but an unintentional miscue is not a foul unless a double hit
is “clearly visible” (per WPA Rules 6.7 and 8.18).

Billiards Digest                                                                                            December, 2009
                   1
                                                    possible
                            double-hit              intended
                           miscue path                path

                                shot “99”
                                  (foul)
                                                                                        9

                              Diagram 3 Double-hit and/or intentional miscue

                       HSV B.28 – Frozen-ball kiss, miscue, and push shots and fouls
high-speed video       HSV B.36 – Various miscues with double-hit rule interpretation

     NV B.63 – part 4 shows various versions of the shot in Diagram 3, with different outcomes.
The shots are also shown in super-slow-motion so you can see what is happening more clearly.
In shot 99, the 1-ball, is “herded” into the pocket. This can occur only with multiple hits on the
CB, as shown in the super-slow-motion clip. Here, based on the motion of the balls, an
experienced referee can confidently judge that the miscue resulted in a double hit. In fact, if the
referee thinks the shooter was intentionally miscuing, hoping the foul wouldn’t be called, he or
she could rule the shot as unsportsmanlike conduct, which can come with a stiffer penalty than
ball-in-hand (e.g., loss of game or the match, per WPA Rules 6.16 and 8.18). In this example, it
doesn’t really matter for the game, because the double-hit foul will result in ball-in-hand with the
9-ball hanger. However, the referee would also have the right to issue an even stronger penalty
(e.g., loss of match) if it is obvious that the miscue was intentional. It might seem odd that a
referee could be asked to judge the intent of a player, but these “gray areas” exist in every sport,
and pool is no exception. A good analogy is a personal foul in football, where the referee must
judge whether or not there is malicious intent to know what penalty is appropriate.

     You can view demonstrations and explanations of all of the shots in this article (and many
other related shots) in parts 4 and 6 of NV B.63. The videos include the appropriate ruling (fair or
foul) and the reason behind each ruling. Be sure to watch the videos online. The super-slow-
motion clips included really help visually reinforce the topics and examples covered.

    Well, I hope you have enjoyed and benefitted from my series of articles dealing with pool
rules. Please encourage all of your pool-playing friends, teammates, league members, and
referees to take the quiz and view the instructional videos online. If people had a better
understanding of all of the rules and how they are applied, there might be fewer “differences of
opinion” during league night.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                            December, 2009
PS:
      •   If you want to refer to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access them
          online at billiards.colostate.edu.
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, impact
          line, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
          come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
          glossary on my website.
      •   I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help
          find errors and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts.
          Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                         December, 2009
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/runout_drill_system_rds.pdf
title: Runout Drill System RDS
topics: technical_proofs, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Runout Drill System (RDS)”                                                  ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    In Bob Jewett’s July and August columns, he presented an interesting family of runout drills that cover a
wide range of playing ability. Since then, Bob and I worked together on a simplified version of the system that
focusses on 8-ball, rotation, and straight pool. I call it the Runout Drill System (RDS). It consists of a set of
16 break-and-run challenges of increasing levels of difficulty. The levels are summarized below along with
associated player ratings (described more below). Online videos NV J.53 and NV J.54 demonstrate all 16
RDS levels and recommend some useful strategy. Each level is also described and illustrated in detail in the
RDS instructions document linked in the online YouTube video descriptions. Images 1 and 2 show example
pages from this document.

RDS Levels:
   1. 6 balls, pocket OBs directly with no CB – lower novice
   2. 6 balls, any order, BIH on every shot – mid novice
   3. 6 balls, any order, 3 extra BIHs – upper novice
   4. 6 balls, any order, 2 extra BIHs – lower beginner (D-)
   5. 6 balls, any order, 1 extra BIHs – mid beginner (D)
   6. 7 balls (3 solids, 3 stripes, 8), 8-ball rules, 1 extra BIH – upper beginner (D+)
   7. 9 balls, any order, 1 extra BIH – lower intermediate (C-)
   8. 9 balls (4 solids, 4 stripes, 8), 8-ball rules, 1 extra BIH – mid intermediate (C)
   9. 15 balls, any order, 2 extra BIHs – upper intermediate (C+)
   10. 6 balls, in order – lower advanced (B-)
   11. 15 balls, any order – mid advanced (B)
   12. 15 balls, 8-ball rules – upper advanced (B+)
   13. 9 balls (4 solids, 4 stripes, 8), 8-ball rules, remaining balls in order – lower shortstop (A-)
   14. 9 balls, 9-ball rules – upper shortstop (A)
   15. 15 balls, 8-ball rules, remaining balls in order – semipro / pro (A+/AA)
   16. 15 balls, in order – world class pro (A++/AAA)

     The number of balls in each RDS rack varies from 6 to 15. You start with a break shot and then take ball
in hand (BIH), meaning you can place the CB anywhere you want on the table. There is no penalty for a
scratch on the break, and balls pocketed on the break remain down. Unlike dedicated skill or setup drills,
where you repeat the same or similar shots or patterns over and over, RDS provides endless variations of
shots, patterns, and game situations. And no table setup is required … just rack, break, and run the balls …
just like playing regular pool. RDS tests and challenges all player levels from complete novice to seasoned
professional. And you get to pocket lots of balls regardless of your playing level, so there is no major
frustration involved. RDS provides excellent practice and helps one develop and improve strategy and
pattern play in the games of 8-ball, 9-ball, 10-ball, and straight pool.

     RDS is progressive and adaptive. When you do well, the level gets harder; and when you do poorly, the
level gets easier. If you run 2 out of 3 racks at one level, where you make all the required balls without a miss
or foul, you go to the next higher level. If you run only 1 of 3, you stay at the current level. And if you do not
run any of the 3, you go down to the next lower level. If you are trying RDS for the first time, pick a level at
which you are confident to run 2 out of 3 racks and start there; otherwise, start where you left off in your
previous RDS session. After a practice session, your ending level and associated rating should be a decent
indicator of your level of playing ability. And if you record your ending levels over time, you will be able to
easily monitor your improvement as your game develops.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         October, 2020
                   Image 1 RDS document page 2

Billiards Digest                                 October, 2020
                                       Image 2 RDS document page 3

    An alternative RDS format is a scored approach, where you start with 100 points and attempt to run one
rack at each level, deducting points left on the table after a miss or foul. I call it RDS 100 and it was adopted
by the Billiard University (BU) as one of its Playing-Ability Exams (Exam IV). The BU recently sponsored a
Challenge offering prizes to thow who could score the highest. If you want to see video entries for the top
scores, they are linked in the YouTube video description of NV J.54. In NV J.54, I demonstrate how to shoot
and score a complete RDS 100 set.

    The Billiard University Rating Comparison table in Image 3 shows how RDS Player Levels (1-16)
compare to other commonly used rating and handicapping systems. So, if you run through the progressive
version of RDS, you can get a fairly good estimate for where you fall on the standard ABCD Rating system
and estimate what your handicap might be in various league systems. You can even estimate your expected
FargoRate score if you do not already have one. So RDS is not just a fun and useful system for learning,
practicing, and teaching pool, it can also be used to estimate your level of playing ability.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     October, 2020
                                         Image 3 Ratings Comparison Chart

    I hope you enjoy and benefit from the Runout Drill System and RDS 100. RDS is great practice for run-
out skills, but it is helpful to also mix up your practice with dedicated skill drills periodically, like those found in
BU Playing-Ability Exams I and II (the basis for the “BU Score” in the table). It is important to develop and
improve your skills, especially the ones you identify during play and RDS practice as problem areas. You
should also work on offensive and defensive skills and techniques you might not use very often during typical
play. That is the only way you will be able to add them to your arsenal. The Video Encyclopedia of Pool
Practice (VEPP) has a large collection of drills to help you work on every technique and skill needed in top-
level pool, so that might be a useful resource to help you develop your game.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.53 – RUNOUT DRILL SYSTEM (RDS) … A New Way to Practice, Teach, and Learn
normal video
                    NV J.54 – RDS 100 CHALLENGE – Enter for Free and Win Prizes

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                           October, 2020
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/safeties_you_must_master.pdf
title: Safeties You Must Master
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Safeties You Must Master”                                                  ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Recently, I posted online video NV J.39 that demonstrates the Top 10 categories of safeties that every
pool player must learn to master. Effective defensive play is one of the main things that separates the great
players from the good ones, so it is an important skill to practice. Diagrams for all shots in the video are
available in the Billiard University (BU) Safety Examples document linked in the YouTube video description
(see Images 1-3).

                                  Image 1 BU Safety Examples (shots 1-4)

1. Stop and Hide

     The most basic type of safety is a simple stop and hide. Shot 1 (top-left) in Image 1 is from 9-ball
example where there is no good shot at the 7 but the safety is very easy, assuming you can hit a stop shot.
As demonstrated in the video, if you need to pull the cue ball (CB) back slightly, you can aim the tip at the
stop-shot position and just drop it a bit. And if you need to roll the CB forward slightly, you can again aim the
tip at the stop-shot position and just raise it a bit.

    Shot 2 (bottom-left) in Image 1 is a similar example, but here there is a two-way shot opportunity. You
plan to hide the CB behind the 9 while also attempting to bank the 7 off 3 rails to the top-right corner. If you
miss the 7, you leave your opponent in a tough spot. And if you make the 7, you can run out for the win.

Billiards Digest                                                                                  September, 2020
2. Roll Up and Snuggle

    Shot 3 (top-right) in Image 1 is also a good safety opportunity. There is no shot at the 7, but you can
easily roll up on the 9 to snooker your opponent.

3. Equal-Separation Hide Behind Blockers

   Shot 4 (bottom-right) in Image 1 is another very reliable type of safety, playing 8-ball as stripes. You just
need to roll the CB and aim for slightly thinner than a ½-ball hit, as covered in NV J.38, my recently-posted
speed control video.

4. Finesse Equal-Separation Hides

     Shot 5 (top-left) in Image 2 uses the same equal-separation principle as Shot 4. The downside here is
you leave your opponent a chance to jump over the stripe for the win. Shot 6 (bottom-left) in Image 2 is
another equal-separation safe, where you can straddle a blocker. One inevitable downside, as demonstrated
in the video, is if your opponent is good at aiming kick shots, he or she might be able to get a good hit and tie
up the 8 with the 9.

                                  Image 2 BU Safety Examples (shots 5-8)

5. Finesse Fractional-Ball Hides

    Shots 7 (top-right) and 8 (bottom-right) in Image 2 and Shot 9 (top-left) in Image 3 are common finesse
safeties. In Shot 7, a ½-ball hit gives good results. As recommended and demonstrated in NV J.38, with
finesse shots it is best to use a short stroke to control your speed. In Shot 8, a full-ball hit gets the job done.
And in Shot 9, a very thin hit results in a good safety. Notice in NV J.39 how I use a very short bridge length
to help ensure I use a very short and soft stroke. Shot 9 is a very effective safety causing your opponent to
go off multiple cushions or attempt a massé kick as demonstrated in the video.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    September, 2020
                                 Image 3 BU Safety Examples (shots 9-14)

6. Separate and Hide Against Long Rail

    Shot 10 (bottom-left) in Image 3 is another common type of safety where you create distance between
the CB and OB, sending both balls close to a long rail with blockers in between. As demonstrated in the
video, an opponent good with massé kicks might try to tie up the 7 with the 8 and 9, but you are still a favorite
to win against most players.

7. Come into the Line of Blockers

     Shot 11 (top-middle) in Image 3 is an 8-ball example where you could use a full hit to snooker the CB
from the 8; however, as demonstrated in the video, you leave a chance for any decent jumper to win the
game from there. A better play is to send the CB behind the two stripes while also trying to block the pocket
with the 3rd stripe. The CB comes into the line of the blockers with this shot, so a wide range of CB speeds
will still snooker your opponent. Ideally, you can leave the CB touching or very close to the stripes to greatly
limit your opponent’s options.

8. Thin-Hit Hide

    Shot 12 (bottom-middle) in Image 3 is another useful safety technique where you thin a nearby object ball
(OB) to create distance and snooker your opponent. When you thin a ball, it does not move very much and
the CB direction is very predictable. Even if you do not hide the CB, you can still leave your opponent with a
tough shot. And with the hide, you are a heavy favorite to win.

9. Send Ball Straight Down Table and Hide

     Shot 13 (top-right) in Image 3 is another common safety situation, where you send the OB straight down
the table and hide behind blockers.

10. Kick-and-Stick Hide

    A final common type of safety is a kick-and-stick like Shot 14 (bottom-right) in Image 3. You want to use
a rolling CB with a shot like this since a ball rolling nearly straight into a cushion rebounds with stun. Even if
the 7 is off the cushion more, this type of shot still works well if you are careful with your aim. This can be a
very effective safety. You can snooker your opponent, create distance, force your opponent to go off two or
more rails, and leave the OB off the cushion some where it is a smaller target. As illustrated in the video, the
worst place to leave the OB is about a ball off the cushion where it is a “big ball” with a very large margin for
error with CB direction.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   September, 2020
    I hope you enjoy and benefit from my Top 10 safety video NV J.39. Be sure to dedicate practice time to
these important types of shots. Again, the shot diagrams, if you want to use them as a drill, are available in
the Billiard University (BU) Safety Examples document linked in the YouTube video description. Also, many
more shots, and much more information dealing with defensive play, can be found in Volume III of the Video
Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB) and Volume IV of the Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball
(VENT) available at drdavebilliards.com.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.38 – Top 10 Speed Control Tips and Drills
normal video
                    NV J.39 – Top 10 Pool Safeties You Must Master

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   September, 2020
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/saws_part_1_cb_deflection.pdf
title: SAWS Part 1 CB Deflection
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“SAWS – Part 1: CB Deflection”                                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference
numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the first article in a series dealing with the “System for Aiming With Sidespin” (SAWS), a full-length
instructional video I just released on DVD and for stream or download. SAWS covers a new system to
compensate your aim for cue ball (CB) deflection and object ball (OB) throw when using sidespin. It is based
on using combinations of Back Hand English (BHE) and Front-Hand English (FHE), and it can be applied to
any cue, bridge length, and shooting style. A detailed table of contents of SAWS along with a video overview
can be found at DrDaveBilliards.com/saws. This month, I will cover the basics of CB deflection.

     Diagram 1 shows the effects that come into play when using sidespin. You must learn how to
compensate for these effects if you want to use sidespin effectively in your game. First, when you hit the CB
off center, it does not go straight. It squirts off line; in this case, to the left with right spin. As we look at
below, different cues create different amounts of squirt. The CB also curves back some, depending on shot
speed and cue elevation. This is called swerve. The combined effects of squirt and swerve is often called CB
deflection (AKA squerve, which is the combination of SQUirt and swERVE), referring to the amount the CB is
off from the aiming line at a given distance.

                                           Diagram 1 CB deflection

     A good way to experience and learn the effects of CB deflection is to set up a straight shot like shown in
Diagram 2, aiming at a target ball on the end cushion. Hitting the shot at different speeds and from different
distances will give you a feel for the important effects. This is also a good way to compare cues or get
accustomed to a new cue that might have a different amount of CB deflection than what you are used to. For
each shot, you should use what is called Parallel English (PE), where you first aim the center of the CB at the
target, and then shift the cue sideways keeping the cue parallel to the original line of aim. Diagram 3
illustrates how PE works, and it is demonstrated in online video NV J.9.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         June, 2019
                                          Diagram 2 CB deflection drill

                                         Diagram 3 Parallel English (PE)

     I recommend using close to maximum sidespin with each shot in Diagram 2 so you can be as consistent
as possible with the amount of spin, and so you can see the full effects. If there were no CB deflection, the
CB would hit the OB squarely, but it doesn’t. As demonstrated on SAWS, first use fast speed, with both left
and right spin. Notice the squirt to the right with left spin and the squirt to the left with right spin. With most
cues, you will miss the OB on the cushion entirely, even though you are aiming straight at the center of the
ball. Obviously, if you do not account for this effect when using sidespin, especially with a fast-speed shots,
you will not be very effective.

    Then try a shorter shot distance. Again, with fast speed and a large amount of sidespin, you will still miss
the target. However, at shorter distance, there is less net CB deflection. At slower speed, there is also less
net CB deflection. Cue elevation, where the back of the cue is higher than the front with the cue angled
above level, also affects CB deflection. Try different cue elevations to see the effects. With more cue
elevation, the CB swerves back more resulting in less net CB deflection. At large cue elevations, swerve is
actually larger than squirt, and net CB deflection is actually in the same direction as the spin. So with left
spin, the CB will go to the left of target; and with right spin, the CB will go to the right of target. But again, this
occurs only when the cue is elevated. With just the right amount of cue elevation for a given cue, shot,

Billiards Digest                                                                                             June, 2019
distance, and shot speed, swerve will exactly cancel squirt resulting in no net CB deflection with the CB hitting
the target OB squarely.

      As I mentioned above, the amount of squirt and net CB deflection can be different with every cue, as
demonstrate with several cues in online video NV J.9 and in the SAWS video. Shafts that produce a lower-
than-average amount of squirt and net CB deflection are called low-deflection or LD shafts. The characteristic
that makes a shaft LD is small "endmass," which is the effective mass of the end of the shaft closest to the tip.
Squirt can be lowered by reducing the weight of the last 5-8 inches of the shaft. This can be done by
reducing the shaft's diameter, drilling out the core of the end of the shaft, using a lighter and/or harder tip,
and/or using a lighter or no ferrule. Diagram 4 shows the internal construction of two LD Predator shafts
showing how the endmass is reduced. The end of the 314 is drilled out, and the carbon-fiber Revo is hollow,
filled with a low-density foam. For more information about endmass and LD shafts, see the LD shaft FAQ
page at billiards.colostate.edu.

                                         Diagram 4 LD shaft construction

    Based on everything you will learn from the Diagram 2 drill, CB deflection varies in a complicated way
with shot speed and distance, cue elevation, cloth conditions, and with the type of cue being used. If you
want to learn more about all important squirt, swerve, and CB deflection (squerve) effects, see the
squirt/swerve/throw effects FAQ page at billiards.colostate.edu. It describes and demonstrates everything
in detail. And if you want to learn how to compensate your aim for these effects, stay tuned to future columns
and check out SAWS.

   I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles dealing with the “System for Aiming With Sidespin”
(SAWS). If you want to learn more, visit DrDaveBilliards.com/saws. Also check out online video NV J.9 that
shows examples of the SAWS system being applied to a wide range of interesting game-situation examples.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV J.9 – "Got English?" – How to Aim Using Sidespin, With Game-Situation Examples
normal video

Billiards Digest                                                                                       June, 2019
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   June, 2019
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/saws_part_2_sidespin_terminology.pdf
title: SAWS Part 2 Sidespin Terminology
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“SAWS – Part 2: Sidespin Terminology”                                      ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference
numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

      This is the second article in a series dealing with the “System for Aiming With Sidespin” (SAWS), a full-
length instructional video I released recently on DVD and for stream or download. SAWS covers a new
system to compensate your aim for cue ball (CB) deflection and object ball (OB) throw when using sidespin.
It is based on using combinations of Back Hand English (BHE) and Front-Hand English (FHE), and it can be
applied to any cue, bridge length, and shooting style. A detailed table of contents of SAWS along with a video
overview can be found at DrDaveBilliards.com/saws. This month, I will cover the basics of sidespin (AKA
english) terminology which is presented in detail early in SAWS.

     Diagram 1 illustrates basic sidespin terminology and effects. Hitting the CB to the left of center creates
clockwise spin that causes the CB to rebound to the left when it hits a cushion (see shot “b”). Hitting the CB
to the right of center creates counterclockwise spin that causes the CB to rebound to the right when it hits a
cushion (see shot “c”). The CB’s initial path after hitting the OB is not affected by sidespin, and the OB’s
direction is affected very little (by throw, which we will look at more in a future article).

                                  Diagram 1 Basic sidespin terminology

    As illustrated in Diagram 2, sidespin is also given special names (besides left and right) in different
situations. When the spin is in the same direction the CB is heading into a cushion it is called natural or
running english because the spin helps the CB maintain (or sometimes increase) its speed with the rebound
angle being lengthened. When the sidespin is in the opposite direction as the motion, it is called reverse or
check english because the spin opposes the motion, slowing the CB and shortening the rebound angle. In
the diagram, the right spin in the top shot is called running english and left spin in the bottom shot is called
reverse english.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       July, 2019
                                 Diagram 2 Running and reverse sidespin

      As illustrated in Diagram 3, when the tip hits the CB on the same side as the direction of the cut, it is
sometimes called inside english. And when the tip hits the CB on the opposite side as the direction of the cut,
it is sometimes called outside english. In the diagram, both shots have right sidespin, but the top shot has
inside english and the bottom shot has outside english.

                                  Diagram 3 Inside and outside sidespin

Billiards Digest                                                                                      July, 2019
    Demonstrations of many interesting game-situation examples of all types of sidespin shots can be found
in SAWS. All of the shots are also diagrammed in a PDF file available on the “sidespin examples” FAQ page
at billiards.colostate.edu. Diagram 4 shows two example pages from the document.

                     Diagram 4 Pages from the “Sidespin Game-Situation Examples” document

    I hope you are enjoying and benefiting from my series of articles dealing with the “System for Aiming With
Sidespin” (SAWS). If you want to learn more, visit DrDaveBilliards.com/saws. Also check out online video
NV J.9 that shows examples of the SAWS system being applied to a wide range of interesting game-situation
examples.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.9 – "Got English?" – How to Aim Using Sidespin, With Game-Situation Examples
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         July, 2019
Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                             July, 2019
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/saws_part_3_throw_effects.pdf
title: SAWS Part 3 Throw Effects
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“SAWS – Part 3: Throw Effects”                                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the third article in a series dealing with the “System for Aiming With Sidespin” (SAWS), a full-
length instructional video I released recently on DVD and for stream or download. SAWS covers a new
system to compensate your aim for cue ball (CB) deflection and object ball (OB) throw when using sidespin.
It uses combinations of Back Hand English (BHE) and Front-Hand English (FHE), and it can be applied to any
cue, bridge length, and shooting style. A detailed table of contents of SAWS along with a video overview can
be found at DrDaveBilliards.com/saws. This month, I will cover the basics of throw, which SAWS presents in
detail.

     Most good pool players are aware of the effects of net CB deflection resulting from squirt and swerve
when using sidespin, and top players are good at adjusting their aim to compensate for these effects, which
vary with shot speed, distance, and the amount and type of spin. Another important effect one must also
adjust for at times is throw. Even top players sometimes fail to compensate for throw when aiming certain
types of shots. In fact, I believe than many shots missed by top players are due to a failure to adjust their aim
for throw.

    As illustrated in Diagram 1, throw is caused by friction between the CB and OB during contact, resulting
from either cut angle or sidespin. With a cut angle (see Diagram 1a), the CB rubs against the OB during
contact, which causes a sideways friction force that pushes the OB off the expected line-of-centers direction.
This is call cut-induced throw or CIT. With sidespin (see Diagram 1b), the CB can also rub against the OB
during contact, which again causes a sideways force that pushes the OB off the expected line-of-centers
direction. This is called spin-induced throw or SIT.

                                  Diagram 1 Cut and Spin Induced Throw

Billiards Digest                                                                                      August, 2019
      To experience the effects of throw and to learn how to adjust your aim when necessary, I recommend a
drill using the ball setup shown in Diagram 2. The OB is in the center of the table with the CB set up for a ½-
ball hit. Two “sentinel” balls make the pocket opening smaller to demand more accuracy. The goal is to
pocket the OB cleanly for a wide variety of shot speeds and spins. With the right amount of outside spin,
called “gearing” outside english, the OB will not throw at all, and the OB will head in the expected “line of
centers” direction into the heart of the pocket. If there is less outside spin than the gearing amount, or inside
spin, or no spin, the OB will throw to the right, as a result of CIT (see the blue shot). And if the amount of
outside spin is greater than the gearing amount, the OB will throw to the left due to SIT (see the red shot). To
prepare for the drill, place balls on the table at all positions in the diagram and choose the pocket sentinel ball
gap based on how accurate you hope to be during the drill. Then tap and mark each ball position with a
donut (self-adhesive reinforcement label) to make it easy to re-spot the balls quickly and consistently. I
recommend also placing a donut at the ghost-ball position, to give yourself a clear aiming target, and another
centered between the sentinel balls to help you see where the OB enters the pocket.

                                            Diagram 2 Throw Drill

     A good way to visualize throw is to think about the direction the CB is rubbing against the OB. The OB
gets thrown off line in the direction of the rub. With no sidespin, the rubbing and throw is to the right. For a
large amount of outside or right spin, the rubbing and throw is to the left. For inside or left spin, the rubbing
and throw is to the right. And for just the right amount of outside or right spin, there is no rubbing or throw
whatsoever, in which case the OB heads exactly in the line-of-centers direction. Be sure to use a striped ball
for the OB, with the stripe oriented vertically as shown in Diagram 2. With a perfect gearing hit and accurate
aim, the stripe will remain vertical during the entire OB motion to the pocket. If there is any throw, spin will
transfer to the OB, which will cause the OB strip to wobble.

     Maximum CIT occurs at a half-ball hit with soft stun, where the CB is sliding with no top or bottom spin at
OB impact. Try to see how much you can throw the OB with an accurate hit. Also vary the speed to see that
there is less throw with more speed. Also vary the cut angle and experiment with how speed affects throw at
different angles. At small cut angles (about 20° or less), speed has no effect on throw. At larger cut angles,
speed has a big effect on throw (especially at 30° or more).

    As part of the drill, try a range of spin directions and amounts to see the effects on throw. You need to be
careful to compensate accurately for net CB deflection (the combined effects of squirt and swerve); otherwise,

Billiards Digest                                                                                       August, 2019
the drill results might be misleading. Make sure you are sending the CB to the center of the ghost-ball
position (at the placed donut). A video camera can help you verify the accuracy of your hits. If you use the
BHE/FHE calibration method presented in SAWS, you will know what percentages of BHE and FHE to use to
get an accurate hit.

     With inside spin, you might think there would be more throw since both the cut and spin effects are in the
same direction. However, this is not the case … CIT and SIT effects do not add. There is actually a little less
throw than with straight stun since friction between the balls is actually a little less when the sliding speed
between the ball surfaces is greater. Remember, with a small amount of outside spin, throw is still to the
right, in the CIT direction. And with more outside spin, the throw is to the left in the SIT direction. And with
even more outside spin, you get even more throw. With top or bottom spin, there is less throw than with stun.
With full top or bottom spin, the amount of throw is about half as compared to stun at the same CB speed.

     To determine the gearing amount of outside spin that results in no throw, it helps to know the “40% rule”
illustrated in Diagram 3. To use this rule, you first visualize the line to the pocket, called the “line of centers,”
which goes through the centers of the OB and the imaginary ghost-ball target. Then you shift this line parallel
to the center of the CB. This helps you visualize the OB contact point, shifted to the CB (see the red dots in
the diagram). The 40% rule states that to achieve “gearing outside spin,” the tip contact point must be 40% of
the distance from the center of the CB to the shifted contact point. So distance “x” must be 40% of distance
“L.” And this works for any cut angle! Note that since the tip and CB have curvature, the contact point is not
at the center of the cue (see the blue dot in the diagram). If you want to be accurate, you need to be careful
to visualize the actual tip contact point when shifting the 40% distance.

                                      Diagram 3 Gearing Spin 40% Rule

     As demonstrated on SAWS, when you first practice the 40% rule, it helps to align the OB so the center of
the number is at the necessary contact point, with the stripe pointing to the pocket. It also helps to use a CB
with a dot or other marking. If you do not have one, you can just use another OB as the CB, with the center of
the number as the dot. Align the CB so the dot is at the projected contact point. It helps to first visualize the
full distance from center to the projected contact point before visualizing the 40% distance.

    For more information and demonstrations related to the 40% rule, see the “gearing outside spin” resource
page in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu. The page also provides guidance on how to make
adjustments to account for draw and follow effects, and for spin changes due to shot distance and drag. If
you start using the system, you might want to refer to this page to be more accurate over a wide range of
shots.

     To adjust your aim to compensate for throw, it helps to know the maximum amount of throw. With typical
ball conditions, maximum throw is about 1” per foot of ball travel, or about ½ a ball per diamond on a 9' table.
Therefore, with a soft stun shot, you should expect about 2” of throw with the throw drill since the OB is
travelling about 2’ to the pocket. And to compensate for that, you will need to aim the OB 2” to the left of

Billiards Digest                                                                                         August, 2019
pocket center to have the OB enter the center of the pocket. Obviously, with a longer shot on a table with
tight pockets, if you do not compensate for throw with soft stun shots, you will not have much success.

    I hope you are enjoying and benefiting from my series of articles dealing with the “System for Aiming With
Sidespin” (SAWS). If you want to learn more, visit DrDaveBilliards.com/saws. Also check out online video
NV J.9 that shows examples of the SAWS system being applied to a wide range of interesting game-situation
examples.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.9 – "Got English?" – How to Aim Using Sidespin, With Game-Situation Examples
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      August, 2019
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/saws_part_4_throw_examples.pdf
title: SAWS Part 4 Throw Examples
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“SAWS – Part 4: Throw Examples”                                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the fourth article in a series dealing with the “System for Aiming With Sidespin” (SAWS), a full-
length instructional video I released recently on DVD and for stream or download. SAWS covers a new
system to compensate your aim for cue ball (CB) deflection and object ball (OB) throw when using sidespin.
It uses combinations of Back Hand English (BHE) and Front-Hand English (FHE), and it can be applied to any
cue, bridge length, and shooting style. A detailed table of contents of SAWS along with a video overview can
be found at DrDaveBilliards.com/saws. Last month, I covered the basics of both cut-induced throw (CIT) and
spin-induced throw (SIT). This month, I will look at some interesting game-situation throw-shot examples
from SAWS.

    Diagram 1 shows an 8-ball example, shooting stripes, where you need to hit a soft stun shot to hold the
CB for the 8 next. If you don’t adjust your aim for throw with a shot like this, you will push the 11 into the rail
and miss the shot, especially on a table with tight pockets. When using soft stun like this, you must aim to
overcut the OB. Since soft stun results in maximum throw, and since maximum throw is about 1” per foot,
you need to aim the OB 2” to the left to account for the throw to the right. Since your goal is to hold for the 8,
ideally you want to hit the 11 as full as possible and still pocket the shot, so you can cheat the pocket and
throw the 11 into the rail a little. As demonstrated on SAWS, with soft speed, you can easily hold the CB for
the 8. Another play demonstrated on SAWS is to use outside spin to allow a fuller hit, making it even easier
to hold for the 8.

                                       Diagram 1 Adjusting aim for CIT

     Diagram 2 shows an example, shooting solids, where you can use throw to your benefit. Even if you just
barely miss the 11, it does not appear you can send the 8 into the pocket since the line of centers heads well
right of the pocket. However, with about 5 feet of OB travel here, you can easily throw the 8 up to 5 inches

Billiards Digest                                                                                    September, 2019
with soft stun, and easily get the 8 to the pocket. If you did not know about throw and how to achieve
maximum throw, you would not know how to pocket this ball.

                                  Diagram 2 Using CIT to pocket a ball

     Diagram 3 shows another example where you can use throw to your benefit, in this case SIT. Again, if
you barely miss the 11, the best angle you can get on the 8 sends it well right of the pocket. But if you use
right spin, you can throw the 8 to the left. It turns out that to get maximum SIT, half of maximum spin
produces the most throw. You might think twice as much spin would create twice as much throw, but this is
not the case since more spin creates greater rubbing speed which reduces the friction between the balls. So
to get maximum throw, use slow stun with half of maximum sidespin.

Billiards Digest                                                                               September, 2019
                                    Diagram 3 Using SIT to pocket a ball

     Diagram 4 shows a combination example, shooting solids, where you can use throw to pocket the 5. The
balls are frozen with the line of centers pointing well left of the pocket. You need to throw the 5 a fairly large
amount to hit the center of the pocket. To get maximum throw here, you need to aim the center of the 3 at the
edge of the 5 to create a center-to-edge (CTE) half-ball hit and use pocket speed. The 3 will throw the 5 to
the right into the pocket.

                                 Diagram 4 Using CIT with a frozen combo
Billiards Digest                                                                                   September, 2019
    SAWS contains many more game-situation examples involving both CIT and SIT. Throw is a complicated
topic if you want to learn all the subtleties, but the most important points to remember are:

               1. Wipe chalk marks off the CB every chance you get (before the break and with ball in hand) to
                  prevent cling/skid/kick.

               2. On most shots, you can ignore throw, especially on short shots on tables with big pockets.

               3. To adjust your aim to compensate for CIT, aim to overcut the shot slightly (i.e., hit a little
                  thinner, or hit a little less of the ball), or use gearing outside english.

               4. The shots you must absolutely change your aim to compensate for throw are slow stun shots
                  close to and thinner than about a 1/2-ball hit, slow roll shots, and shots with an amount of
                  sidespin much different than the gearing outside amount.

               5. The 40% rule can be used to judge the amount of gearing outside spin. If the amount of spin is
                  greater than this, throw will be in the SIT direction; if the amount of spin is less than this, throw
                  will be in the CIT direction; and if the amount of spin is the gearing amount, there will be no throw.

               6. You must adjust for throw when aiming frozen or small-gap combination shots.

               7. Maximum throw is generally about 1 inch per foot of OB travel, or 1/2 a ball per diamond on a 9'
                  table.

               8. CIT is largest for slow-speed stun shots close to about a 1/2-ball hit.

               9. To get maximum SIT with a straight shot, use stun, slow speed, and about 50% of maximum
                  sidespin.

               10. Throw is smaller with follow and draw shots (about 1/2 with maximum backspin or full-roll
                   topspin). Although, with a soft draw shot, much of the backspin is lost due to drag on the way to
                   the OB which can result in a large amount of throw.

    For more information and demonstrations related to all of these topics, see SAWS and the illustrations,
videos, and links on the throw tutorial page at billiards.colostate.edu.

    I hope you are enjoying and benefiting from my series of articles dealing with the “System for Aiming With
Sidespin” (SAWS). If you want to learn more, visit DrDaveBilliards.com/saws. Also check out online video
NV J.9 that shows examples of the SAWS system being applied to a wide range of interesting game-situation
examples.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.9 – "Got English?" – How to Aim Using Sidespin, With Game-Situation Examples
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         September, 2019
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/saws_part_5_bhe_fhe_calibration.pdf
title: SAWS Part 5 BHE FHE Calibration
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“SAWS – Part 5: BHE/FHE Calibration”                                         ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the fifth article in a series dealing with the “System for Aiming With Sidespin” (SAWS), a full-length
instructional video I released recently on DVD and for stream or download. SAWS covers a new system to
compensate your aim for cue ball (CB) deflection and object ball (OB) throw when using sidespin. It uses
combinations of Back Hand English (BHE) and Front-Hand English (FHE), and it can be applied to any cue,
bridge length, and shooting style. A detailed table of contents of SAWS along with a video overview can be
found at DrDaveBilliards.com/saws. In the last two issues, I covered how to adjust your aim for cut-induced
and spin-induced throw. This month, I will look at how to adjust your aim for CB deflection, which is the
combined effect of squirt and swerve. If you don’t know what all of these terms mean, check out videos and
resources on the “aim compensation when using sidespin” resource page in the FAQ section at
billiards.colostate.edu.

    Before looking at the heart of the SAWS system, we need to review BHE and FHE. Diagram 1 shows
how BHE works. You first aim with center-ball alignment, with the cue pointing in the desired CB direction.
Then, you pivot your back (grip) hand while keeping the bridge hand still. This adjusts the aiming direction;
and if the bridge length is just right for the given cue and shot, the pivot angle will exactly cancel CB
deflection, sending the CB in the desired direction. As demonstrated on SAWS, I pivot the head and entire
body together with the cue to maintain the cue-body relationship during a BHE pivot.

                                    Diagram 1 Back Hand English (BHE)

    Diagram 2 shows how FHE works. With FHE, you move the bridge hand instead of the back (grip) hand.
This results in a much larger effective pivot distance and less aim correction. Again, in certain situations, it is
possible for the FHE pivot to exactly cancel CB deflection, sending the CB in the desired direction. When

Billiards Digest                                                                                      October, 2019
doing a FHE pivot, it is best to keep your head and body perfectly still while you shift the front (bridge) hand
only.

                                   Diagram 2 Front-Hand English (FHE)

    Net CB deflection varies in complicated ways for different types of shots. Fortunately, the SAWS system
compensates for CB deflection automatically for shots of every speed and distance. On the SAWS resource
page, there is a BHE/FHE Calibration Document that describes the procedure you can use to determine the
combinations of BHE and FHE needed for your cue and preferred bridge length. It is based on shooting three
shots at three different distances (short, medium, and long), each at three different speeds (slow, medium,
and fast). Diagram 3 shows the CB positions for each of the shot distances, and Table 1 is used to record
the BHE/FHE percentages required to send the CB in the desired direction for each shot distance and speed.
When you are done with the calibration drill, you will be able to use appropriate combinations of BHE and
FHE to automatically compensate your aim for CB deflection for shots of any distance, any speed, any
amount of sidespin.

                               Diagram 3 SAWS BHE/FHE Calibration Shots

Billiards Digest                                                                                    October, 2019
                                  Table 1 SAWS BHE/FHE Calibration Table

                                                                       speed
                                              slow                     medium                    fast*
                     short (1’)             BHE: __%                  BHE: __%                 BHE: __%
                                            FHE: __%                  FHE: __%                 FHE: __%
                   medium (3’)              BHE: __%                  BHE: __%                 BHE: __%
     distance
                                            FHE: __%                  FHE: __%                 FHE: __%
                      long (6’)             BHE: __%                  BHE: __%                 BHE: __%
                                            FHE: __%                  FHE: __%                 FHE: __%

      To do the calibration drill, first place balls on the table at each of the three CB positions in Diagram 3, and
then place the center and sentinel balls by the pocket. Adjust the balls so the gaps appear to be about the
same size when looking back at both CB directions. You can tighten the gap size after you gain more
experience and skill with the system. Once you have the ball positions set, tap down on them and place
donuts (“self-adhesive hole reinforcement labels”) so you can spot the balls quickly and accurately during the
drill.

    You should complete each column in the calibration table (Table 1) before moving to the next. First
practice the column’s speed, starting with “slow.” You can define the speeds (slow, medium, and fast) any
way you want, as long as you are consistent, but this is how I define them in the calibration document:

                                Speed definitions (hitting from the head string):
                                  • “slow” – ¼ stroke off 1 rail back to the head string
                                  • “medium” – ½ stroke off 2 rails to the center string
                                  • “fast” – ¾ stroke off 3 rails to the foot string

A good way to control your speed is to vary your stroke length. For example, I can achieve my “slow” speed
fairly consistently by using only ¼ of my full bridge length during the backstroke. And for the “fast” speed, I
use ¾ of my bridge length for the stroke.

    One of the best things about the SAWS system is that it can be individualized for any bridge length, any
grip hand position, any cue, and any speed definitions, as long as everything is consistent. Your BHE/FHE
percentages will be probably be different than mine, but they will be your numbers and they will work for you.

     At each CB position, you need to find the percentages of BHE vs. FHE required to pocket the CB cleanly.
If you don’t know what values to start with, you can use the example numbers in my calibration document. To
keep things simple and consistent, use pure right sidespin (with no top or bottom) for every shot, and hit close
to the miscue limit for maximum spin. The system will work for any amount of sidespin, but for best accuracy
with the calibration, it is best to use maximum spin.

     If you use too much BHE, you will overcorrect for CB deflection, and the CB will go too far to your right
with right sidespin. If you don’t use enough BHE, you will not correct enough for CB deflection, and the CB
will go too far to your left with right sidespin. Adjust the BHE/FHE percentages until you pocket the CB
cleanly. If the CB goes to your right, use less BHE; and if the CB goes left, use more. If you want to get
really accurate values, it can help to focus on the pocket center donut, or have a friend watch from above, to
notice where the CB enters the pocket.

     After you find the required BHE/FHE percentages for each shot speed and each shot distance, the entire
calibration table will be completed. You should also repeat the entire process again for left sidespin instead.
This will give you more practice with the pivots and make sure you are pivoting the same way both right and
left. If you pivot properly in both directions, the BHE/FHE percentages should be the same on both sides.

    I hope you have good success with the drill. If not, work with it some more until you can pocket the CB
cleanly at every distance and with every speed consistently, with both right and left sidespin. Then you will be

Billiards Digest                                                                                        October, 2019
ready to use the SAWS system to pocket a wide range of shots using sidespin. And the best part is that no
thinking or judgement is required, and you don’t need solid intuition built up by years of successful practice
and experience. You can start using the system effectively immediately. Just pivot with the right percentages
of BHE and FHE for the shot at hand, with the desired amount of sidespin, and the CB will automatically go
where you want. And even if you choose to not use SAWS at all, the calibration drill is still useful to help you
experience and learn the effects of squirt, swerve, and net CB deflection.

   Next month, I will show some examples of applying the SAWS system to a wide range of game-situation
examples so you can see how easy, useful, and effective it can be.

    I hope you are enjoying and benefiting from my series of articles dealing with the “System for Aiming With
Sidespin” (SAWS). If you want to learn more, visit DrDaveBilliards.com/saws. Also check out online video
NV J.9 that shows examples of the SAWS system being applied to a wide range of interesting game-situation
examples.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.9 – "Got English?" – How to Aim Using Sidespin, With Game-Situation Examples
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     October, 2019
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/saws_part_6_shot_examples.pdf
title: SAWS Part 6 Shot Examples
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“SAWS – Part 6: Shot Examples”                                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

      This is the sixth and final article in a series dealing with the “System for Aiming With Sidespin” (SAWS), a
full-length instructional video I released recently on DVD and for stream or download. SAWS covers a new
system to compensate your aim for cue ball (CB) deflection and object ball (OB) throw when using sidespin.
It uses combinations of Back Hand English (BHE) and Front-Hand English (FHE), and it can be applied to any
cue, bridge length, and shooting style. A detailed table of contents of SAWS along with a video overview can
be found at DrDaveBilliards.com/saws. In the last few issues, I have covered how to adjust your aim for both
throw and CB deflection. This month, I will look at several interesting game-situation examples, showing how
the SAWS system is applied.

     The shots in this article are taken from the Sidespin Shot Examples handout available on the SAWS
resource page. I will go through the first four shots. The SAWS video demonstrates how to apply the system
to all 18 shots in the document. Diagrams 1 and 2 show shots 1 through 4 from the first two pages of the
handout. Each shot diagram shows the ball layout and has a place to write in the BHE/FHE percentages from
your calibration drill results. My results are shown in Diagram 3. If you have not completed the BHE/FHE
calibration drill yet, refer back to my recent articles and see the SAWS BHE/FHE calibration handout on the
SAWS resource page. When you are done, you should know the percentages of BHE and FHE to use for
every shot distance and speed for your specific cue and bridge length. I will use my numbers in the examples
here. I will also indicate where I am making adjustments for draw and follow, and throw.

    I will explain things in detail only for the first shot, but I apply the same approach to the others. Before
continuing, I want to stress the importance of reliable aiming. If you are not able to pocket center-ball cut
shots consistently, you won’t have much success with using sidespin. If you want help with aiming, see the
online aiming tutorial on the SAWS resource page.

     With the first shot in Diagram 1, you need to follow forward with right spin to get shape on the 8 next.
The natural follow angle sends the CB straight into the end rail and the right spin makes the CB rebound to
the right. This a medium distance shot that requires medium speed, and my calibration table in Diagram 3
calls for 70% BHE and 30% FHE. To keep things simple, you could just use these numbers as is; but if you
want to be more accurate as you improve and gain more experience with the system, you can make
adjustments for draw and follow effects. With follow, you should increase FHE; and with draw or backspin,
you should increase BHE. The ideal amount to add depends some on shot distance and speed and the
amount of top or bottom spin, but the simplest approach is to always use a 10% adjustment. This is a good
average value that works well for most follow and draw shots. This shot requires follow, so I would add 10%
FHE, changing my 70/30 to 60/40.

    The amount of sidespin required depends on the amount of rebound angle change you need off the
cushion. You will learn how much spin to use for different types of shots with experience, and it will depend
some on table conditions. That’s why it is important to do drills and practice shots like the ones in the
sidespin shot examples handout.

     Concerning compensating aim for throw, you could just decide to not adjust at all for throw, especially
when you first work with the system. For many shots, throw is small enough to neglect, especially when the
OB is close to the pocket. Instead, you could use all the information covered in my previous two articles to
decide when and how much to adjust. To keep things simple, I think the best approach is to just aim to the
right or left of pocket center based on the expected throw direction. The cut and spin direction in shot 1 will
throw the OB to the left some, so you should aim at overcut the shot slightly toward the right side of the
pocket to compensate.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    November, 2019
                   Diagram 1 First page from Sidespin Examples handout

Billiards Digest                                                         November, 2019
                   Diagram 2 Second page from Sidespin Examples handout

Billiards Digest                                                          November, 2019
                            Diagram 3 Dr. Dave’s BHE/FHE Calibration results

     It is best to pick your BHE/FHE numbers and compensate your aim for throw first, before you get down on
the shot. That way, you won’t need to think about or judge anything when you are in your stance. You will
just need to align your vision and cue for center-ball aim, already adjusted for throw. Then you do the
BHE/FHE pivots without thinking, to apply the desired amount of sidespin and automatically compensate for
net CB deflection. All of this might sound complicated, but it is not, especially after you practice with the
system. And the system is a lot more reliable and less confusing than trying to use your intuition and
judgement to compensate for everything together, especially if your intuition and judgement are not solid
based on countless years of successful practice and experience.

    Everything is the same with the second shot shown in Diagram 1 except for spin direction and throw.
You need a large amount of left sidespin because the CB will be heading straight into the cushion, and the
required rebound angle change is large. The amount of spin required will depend some on table conditions.
And with all these diagrammed shot examples, it will also depend on exactly where you place the CB and OB
on the table. Small changes in ball positions can affect angles and required spin amounts a lot. Since the
amount of outside spin is greater than the gearing amount, you should aim to the left side of the pocket to
account for spin-induced throw (SIT).

     The third shot, shown in Diagram 2, requires running english to send the CB around the table for a shot
at the 8. This is a short shot requiring fast speed, and my calibration table calls for 90% BHE and 10% FHE.
Since a lot of spin is appropriate with this shot, you should aim full to compensate for SIT.

     The fourth shot, shown in Diagram 2, requires reverse english to hold the CB at the bottom end of the
table for a shot at the 8. This is a short shot requiring medium speed, and my calibration table calls for 80%
BHE and 20% FHE. This shot requires follow, so I would add 10% FHE, changing my 80/20 to 70/30. There
will be cut-induced throw (CIT) to the left, so I will aim to overcut the shot slightly.

    I hope you enjoy and benefit from practicing all of the sidespin shot examples in the handout. It helps to
watch the SAWS video and read this article, but you obviously need to experience them yourself at a table to
learn how to apply everything I have covered.

    As you improve your aiming and shot-making skills and gain more confidence and experience with the
SAWS system, you will learn to make more accurate adjustments for draw and follow effects, and throw, but
be sure to keep things simple at first.

    I hope you have enjoyed and benefited from my series of articles dealing with the “System for Aiming
With Sidespin” (SAWS). If you want to learn more, visit DrDaveBilliards.com/saws. Also check out online
video NV J.9 that shows examples of the SAWS system being applied to a wide range of interesting game-
situation examples.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                                November, 2019
                    NV J.9 – "Got English?" – How to Aim Using Sidespin, With Game-Situation Examples
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    November, 2019
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/sidespin_mythbuster.pdf
title: Sidespin Mythbuster
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Sidespin MythBuster”                                                         ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at DrDavePoolInfo.com. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    There are a lot of myths out there concerning sidespin. In a recent two-part online video series (NV L.40),
I debunked all of them. Below, I summarize some of the highlights from the videos. Enjoy!

Myth 1 – Sidespin Changes CB Direction
    Many people think sidespin changes the direction the cue ball (CB) heads off the object ball (OB). Image
1 shows a good example shot to illustrate this. Do you think right sidespin will send the CB to my right, as
shown by the white line? Well, you can certainly do this, but not for the reason you might think. As
demonstrated in the video, I can just as easily send the CB to my left with right spin. I can even make the CB
stop in place with right spin. It is pocket cheating, not sidespin, that determines which way the CB heads. When
you send the OB into the heart of the pocket, the CB stops in place, even with a large amount of right sidespin.
And if you send the OB into the right side of the pocket the CB will move to the left, with or without left or right
sidespin. Again, sidespin is not used to change the direction the CB heads off the OB. It is instead primarily
used to change rebound angles off cushions, as demonstrated by the collection of example game-situation
shots shown in the video.

                                Image 1 CB direction change with sidespin?

     Although, it is possible to manipulate CB and OB motion slightly with sidespin and throw. Image 2 shows
a good example from Volume II of the Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB). We need to pocket the 9 and
hold the CB for a shot at the 14, to continue the runout. As demonstrated in the video, with stun and no sidespin,
because we need to cut the 9 to the left, there will be throw to the right. Therefore, we need to overcut it slightly
to compensate for this. As demonstrated, even at less than pocket speed, with as little angle to the pocket as
possible, you still can’t hold the CB for the 14. However, with about half of maximum right sidespin and stun at
pocket speed, you can easily hold shape. Spin-induced throw (SIT) allows a fuller hit since the 9 will be thrown
to the left. This will result in less CB motion, allowing you to hold for the 14. This technique works best when
the CB is a few inches from the OB, and it is less effective (or not effective at all) at larger distances.

Billiards Digest                                       1                                                    May 2025
                                     Image 2 Holding the CB with SIT

Myth 2 – Aiming With Sidespin Is Easy
     Many people think it is quick and easy to intuitively learn how to adjust your aim when using sidespin, but
this is simply wrong. As shown in Image 3, when you hit the CB off center it doesn’t go straight. It squirts off
to the side, and the amount of squirt depends on the amount of sidespin and the shaft properties. The CB also
swerves back some, and the amount of swerve depends on shot speed and distance, the amount and type of
spin, cue elevation, and ball/cloth conditions. The net effect of squirt and swerve is called CB deflection. You
need to aim very differently for shots of different speeds and distances with different amounts and types of
sidespin. And it can take many years of successful practice and experience to develop the feel necessary to
make all these adjustments intuitively. That’s why I developed System for Aiming With Sidespin (SAWS).
SAWS makes it easy to adjust for CB deflection over a full range of shot speeds and distances for any amount
and type of spin. For more information and examples, see the SAWS link in the online video description.

                                           Image 3 CB deflection

Billiards Digest                                     2                                                 May 2025
Myth 3 – LD Shafts Eliminate the Need to Adjust for CB Deflection
     Many people think that if you use a low-deflection (LD) shaft, you don’t need to adjust your aim for CB
deflection, but this is simply wrong. For proof, check out the videos and results on the cue testing and carbon
fiber shaft resource pages linked in the online video description. LD shafts do produce less CB deflection than
non-LD shafts; but if you don’t adjust your aim when using sidespin with an LD shaft, you will miss many shots.
And not all LD and carbon fiber shafts are the same. If you check out my carbon fiber LD shaft comparison
videos, you will see that the amounts of CB deflection can be very different.

Myth 4 – Throwing Balls in With Outside Spin is Helpful
     Many people think that it is helpful or necessary to use outside spin to throw balls in, but this is not the best
advice for most people. Now, if you don’t adjust your aim for cut-induced throw (CIT), the OB will not go exactly
where you expect. But this can be easily corrected by overcutting the ball slightly. For example, with the shot
in Image 4, since I know the 11 will throw to my right, I aim to cheat the pocket to the left so the ball gets thrown
to the heart of the pocket. I also need to add a touch of backspin to create the desired CB motion back from
the shifted tangent line to clear the obstacle balls (the 1 and 5).

                                         Image 4 Compensating for CIT

      The problem with using outside spin instead is if you use too much spin, you will throw the OB in the SIT
direction; and if you don’t use enough spin, you will throw the OB in the cut-induced throw direction. And this
can cause you to miss the shot, especially if the distance to the pocket is long and the pocket is small. Now, if
you are good at adjusting your aim for CB deflection and you use the exact amount of spin required for the
given cut angle, you can send the OB into the heart of the pocket with this approach. But this is much more
difficult for most people as compared to simply overcutting the ball slightly to compensate for CIT.

Myth 5 – Pros Don’t Use Sidespin Much
    Some people think top players do not use sidespin much, but this is simply wrong. It is true that due to the
complexities involved with aiming with sidespin, it should be used only when it is required or when it provides
an advantage, but top players do use sidespin frequently (often in only small amounts) in their games. As
demonstrated with many examples in the online video, they use sidespin to change the rebound angle off a

Billiards Digest                                        3                                                    May 2025
cushion, to come into the line of the next shot, to make it easier to get around the table, to help spin in large-
angle rail cut shots, to change the rebound angle on a kick shot, to throw a ball in, or to swerve or massé around
an obstacle ball. Many examples of when and why sidespin is used can be found in the videos and document
at the link in the online video description.

     Be sure to check out my sidespin mythbusting videos in online video series NV L.40. Give all the shots a
try to get the full benefit of the information and techniques. I hope the article and videos helped debunk some
misconceptions you might have had concerning sidespin. If you want to learn about many more common pool
myths and misconceptions, see the Top 100 Pool Myths page linked in the online video description. The page
debunks them all, backed up by supporting resources and clear demonstrations.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV L.40 – Common SIDESPIN MYTHS Debunked
   normal video

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at DrDavePoolInfo.com.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                         4                                                   May 2025
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/sliding_and_rolling_the_physics_of_a_rolling_ball.pdf
title: Sliding and rolling: the physics of a rolling ball
topics: collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
Sliding and rolling: the physics of
                       a rolling ball
                      J Hierrezuelo Secondary School I B Reyes Catdicos (Vdez-
                      Mdaga),Spain and C Carnero University o f Malaga, Spain

We present an approach that provides a simple and          there is an extra difficulty: most students think that it
adequate procedure for introducing the concept of          is not possible for a body to roll without slipping
rolling friction. In addition, we discuss some             unless there is a frictional force involved. In fact,
aspects related to rolling motion that are the             when we ask students, 'why do rolling bodies come to
source o f students' misconceptions. Several               rest?, in most cases the answer is, 'because the
didactic suggestions are given.                            frictional force acting on the body provides a
                                                           negative acceleration decreasing the speed of the
Rolling motion plays an important role in many             body'. In order to gain a good understanding of
familiar situations and in a number of technical           rolling motion, which is bound to be useful in further
applications, so this kind of motion is the subject of     advanced courses. these aspects should be properly
considerable attention in most introductory                darified.
mechanics courses in science and engineering.              The outline of this article is as follows. Firstly, we
However, we often find that students make errors           describe the motion of a rigid sphere on a rigid
when they try to interpret certain situations related       horizontal plane. In this section, we compare two
to this motion.                                            situations: (1) rolling and slipping, and ( 2 ) rolling
It must be recognized that a correct analysis of rolling   without slipping. From the results obtained in this
motion requires a good understanding of a number            study, the case of a real body is considered. Here, the
of topics in mechanics. Several aspects have been           concept of rolling resistance is established.
shown to be the source of students' misconceptions.
The first, and possibly the most important, is the one
 related to the role of the frictional force in rolling    Rigid sphere moving on a rigid horizontal
objects, as previously described (Shaw 1979, Salazar       plane
et a/ 1990, McClelland 1991, Carnero et ol 1993). A        Let us consider, for instance, a rigid sphere, solid and
second aspect refers to the difficulty for students in     uniform, of mass M and radius r, which is thrown
appreciating that translation and rotation occur           horizontally along a rigid horizontal surface with an
simultaneously in rolling motion. This fact has            initial velocity v,. To study the motion described by
 recently been studied by Menigaux (1994), who             the sphere we must consider two phases which are
 rightly indicates that, in the case of a real body,       dearly different. In the first phase a frictional force (0
 deformation must be included in the analysis of the       acts on the sphere in the direction opposite to the
 problem. Moreover, in the study of rolling motion         motion of the centre of mass (CM)of the body, as

                                                                                                                 I77
I NEW APPROACHES
shown in figure 1, In this stage the sphere rolls and       bY
slips at the same time. The dynamic equations that
describe this situation are
                                                                                   f=       wag                    (3)
                                                            where pr is the coefficient of kinetic friction between
      XF = Ma,                   - f=Ma,             (1)    the two surfaces. From equations ( l ) , (2) and (3) we
                                                            obtain the acceleration of the CM, as well as the
      Z T =/,cy                  fr =,/ a            (2)    angular acceleration of the sphere:
where ow is the acceleration of the CM,,/ is the
moment of inertia about an axis through the
CM       = I M?), and T is the torque with respect to
the CM. It ys important t o note that. as the sphere is
rolling and slipping. we must calculate torques only
about an axis passing through the CM. This question         On the other hand, as the acceleration of the CM and
is often the origin of errors, since some authors advise    the angular acceleration are constants during this
the choice of the socalled instantaneous axis (axis         phase, the corresponding kinematic equations can be
passing through the point of contact between the            used to obtain the linear speed (vJand the angular
rolling body and the surface) t o describe the rolling
motion, though the use of this axis is possible only for
                                                            sped (4
rolling bodies without slipping. Although in certain                           v, = v, - p+g t                     (6)
situations the choice of the instantaneous axis can
facilitate the calculation. we have observed that it                            w = wt
                                                                                             2r                    (7)
can also lead students into errors. For example, we
have often found that students take the                     where we have assumed that the sphere was thrown
instantaneous axis even in the case of a body that          without initial angular speed. One should note, from
 rolls and slips at the same time. In our opinion there     the expressions previously derived, the important fact
are two reasons why the use of the instantaneous            that in this first phase of the motion the linear and
axis to describe the motion of rolling bodies should        rotational quantities are not related through
 not be advised. (i) Students tend to apply the same        v, = rm and a, = re, since the sphere rolls and
 approach regardless of its applicability. (ii) With the    slips at the same time. This point is often the source
 use of the instantaneous axis students may forget the
 fact that translation and rotation occur
                                                                  12
 simultaneously.
 Note that f is the sliding frictional force (dynamic
 friction force), since slipping between the sphere and
 the surface occurs, hence this frictional force is given
                                                              m
                                                              m                                                    m
                                                              m                                                    v1
                                                              L
                                                              0
                                                              m
                                                                  8
                                                              E
                                                              J
                                                                                                                   m

                                                                                                               0
                                                                       0   1   2        3     4   5   6    7
                                                                                    time (s)
                                                                                                                        I
                                                             Figure 2. Linear and angular speeds as functions of
                                                             time for a rigid sphere thrown along a horizontal
Figure 1. Rigid sphere rolling and slipping olong o          rigid suifacoce (See the text for conditions of the
horizontal rigid surface                                     motion.)

I78
                                                                                      NEW APPROACHES

of students' errors, and therefore it must be made             this fact we must analyse the problem from a real
clear that, although there is a connection between              point of view. Hitherto we have considered that both
translation and rotation, v, # rw and a, # r a                 the body and the surface are perfectly rigid, which is
because of sliding.                                            not a real situation. In general, we must assume that
 From equations (6) and (7) it can be observed that,           the rolling and/or the sustaining plane deform
while the sphere is acquiring angular speed, its linear        slightly, in such a way that there is not a contact
 speed gradually decreases. At the point when                  point between them, but a contact area. Although, in
 v,= rw. the sphere thereafter rolls at constant               general, the deformation is produced in both
speed without slipping. At this moment the frictional          surfaces, in most cases we can neglect the
force disappears, and the sphere begins the second             deformation of one of them. In this way we can divide
 phase of its motion. In this second stage the sphere          the problem into two parts: a deformable body rolling
describes a uniform motion. In figure 2 we have                along a rigid surface, and a rigid body rolling on a
plotted v, and w as functions of time for a sphere of          deformable surface.
 radius 10 cm. which is thrown horizontally with an
 initial speed of 10 m s-' along a horizontal plane,        Deformable body rolling freely on a rigid
and assuming a coefficient of kinetic friction of 0.1.      horizontal surface. This would be the case, for
 In this figure the two phases of the motion are clearly   instance, of an automobile tyre when it is not under
shown. The first phase is described by equations (6)       traction. An interesting study on this subject,
and (7). and here a frictional force is involved. The      including more complex situations, has recently been
second phase corresponds to uniform motion, and            published (Tabor 1994). In this case an asymmetric
there is no frictional force. Our experience reveals       deformation takes place, in such a way that the
that this is a delicate point in the analysis of rolling   normal force exerted by the plane (i.e. horizontal
motion.                                                    surface) on the tyre now acts at a point slightly
In general, students raise two questions (i) how can       displaced from the theoretical contact point. Figure 3
the frictional force disappear?, (ii) if the frictional    shows such a situation. A a consequence, the normal
force disappears, what causes the torque providing         force exerts a toque about the CM (see figure 3)
the rotation? The first question derives from a poor       opposed to the tyre rotation, which causes a
understanding of the concept of frictional force; in       reduction in the angular speed ofthetyre.This torque
this respect we must remember that a frictional force      is given by
appears (a) when there is a relative motion between
                                                                                     r, = pN
two surfaces or (b) when there is a force that                                                                    (8)
attempts to cause relative motion, though without          where p is the displacement of N with respect to the
achieving it. Neither of the two conditions occurs in      action line o f W p depends essentially on three
the second phase of the motion. Note that when a           factors: (i) the elastic properties of the rolling body,
rolling body rolls without slipping, the point of          (ii) its radius and (iii) the effective load that the
contact of the body with the surface is always             tyre bears. Because the torque opposes the tyre
instantaneously a t rest with respect to the sustaining    rotation, it is referred to as rolling friction and is
surface. The idea that a torque is necessary to
maintain rotation is a very common misconception of
Newton's second law for rotation. Here, we must
emphasize again that a torque acting on a body
causes a chonge in its angular speed.

Rolling friction
From the preceding section it can be concluded that,
once the sphere reaches the pure rolling state (rolling    I
without slipping), the motion continues indefinitely       Figure 3. Diagmm showing the forces octing on a
with a constant speed. However, our experience             deformable rolhg object moving on a horizontal
shows that, sooner or later, the body stops. To explain    rigid surfoce

                                                                                                                 I 79
 NEW A P P R O A C H E S

usually many times smaller than the sliding friction;     (11) that
therefore balls and rollers are widely used in many                             R,6 =$RE                       (12)
technical applications to reduce the friction between
surfaces.                                                 which indicates that
                                                                               R y 6 > RJ.                      (13)
Rigid rolling body moving freely on a deformable
horizontal surface. This is the case of a billiard ball
moving on a cloth-covered billiard table. Here the        In this manner, the deceleration of the ball is justified
deformation of the ball can be negleded in relation       by the contribution of two effects: (1) the action of
to the deformation of the cloth. The situation that we
                                                          the horizontal component (R,) opposed to the
must analyse is shown in figure 4(0). Now the             velocity of the CM of the ball, and (2) a resultant
reaction force R will be normal to the surface of         torque that provides a deceleration of the rotation. In
contact, and will be applied a t a point (A') slightly    summary, the force R plays the role of a rolling
above the theoretical point (A). As a consequence, R      resistive force, which explains the deceleration of the
                                                          ball.
is not vertical and can be resolved into two
components+ horizontal component (R,) and a               On the other hand, equation (12) can also be
vertical component (R,). These two components are         expressed as
shown in detail in figure 4(b).
The equations that govern the motion of the ball.                                R = -5 -6
                                                                                 A                             (14)
                                                                                 R,     7 r
according to figure 4(b).are
                                                          where 6/r = sin 0 (see figure 4(b)).Assuming small
                     - R, = MO,                    (9)    deformations (sin 0 = e and sin p = p) and taking
                                                          into account that R,. = W, we obtain
                     R,-W=O                       (10)
                                                                            R, = R p = f M g 0                 (15)
                 R@ - Rr 6 = /,or                 (11)
                                                          so that the rolling resistive force R is a constant force,
where torques have been taken about the CM. and the
                                                          which is determined by the deformation of the
moment of inertia is expressed about an axis through
                                                          surface, but independent of the velocity of the ball.
the same point. If the ball rolls without slipping
(om= ra) then, taking into account the          value     Moreover, we think that it is possible to give a further
($W)and assuming small deformations ( h = r), it          argument to explain how a rolling body comes to rest.
can be immediately deduced from equations (9) and         The velocity of any point (P) of the rolling body is the

                                                                                                I
                                                                                              .-+-
                                                                                                I
                                                                                                I
                                                                                                I
                                                                                                I
                                                                                                Ih
                                                                                                I
                                                                                                I
                                                                                                I
                                                                                                I
                                                                                                I
                                                                                              _ _I_

Figure 4. (a) Rigid sphere on a deformablesurface (b) Detoil o f the distribution of form acting on the
sphere.
I80
                                                                                  NEW APPROACHES

Figure 5. Rigid sphere on a defDnnablesurfoce while the velocity of the point A is zero (o), the point A'hos
o velocity (vx # 0) with respect to the surface (b).

vector sum of two velocities: the velocity of the CM       sliding frictional force appears, which contributes to
)v(,  relative to the surface plus the tangential          stopping the body.
velocity (w x r?)of the point relative to the CM. that
 is                                                        Concluding remarks
                          +
                 v, = v, o x r,.                 (16)
                                                           The treatment presented in this paper may contribute
For this reason, while the velocity of the point A is      to a better understanding of rolling motion, and we
zero (see figure 5(0)). the velocity of the point A' is    think that it is highly advisable in a physics
not zero, but is finite relative to the surface as         introductory course. In particular, the use of the
illustrated in figure 5(b). Since there is a relative      approach given here can help to essentially clarify
motion between the point A' and the surface. it            two points: (1) that a frictional force is not always
seems correct to consider a sliding frictional force       involved in a rolling motion, and ( 2 ) that a complete
acting at the point A'.Given that the sliding frictional   analysis of rolling motion assumes a deformation in
force is always opposed to the relative motion             the rolling surface and/or on the sustaining surface.
between the two surfaces, it would be valid to             With regard to this last aspect, we think that the
suppose that this frictional force (f) has a direction     discussion of the concept of rolling friction could form
opposite to the velocity of the point A', as shown in      an adequate introduction, which could help students
figure 5(b). In this manner, the presence of this          in the analysis of more complex physical phenomena.
sliding frictional force (f) can also explain the
decrease of both the angular speed and the
translational speed of the body.                           References and further reading
 In our opinion.this last argument must be taken into      Camera C, Aguiar J and Hierrezuelo J 1993 The
account as well as the effect caused by the action of      work of the frictional force in rolling motion Phys
the force exerted by the surface on the body, as           EdUc 28 225-7
established above. An important feature in rolling         Domenech A. Domenech T and Cebrian 1 1987
 motion consists in appreciating the fact that the         Introduction to the study of rolling motion Am. 1.
absence of a sliding frictional force. in the case of a    Php. 55 231-5
 rigid body rolling along a rigid surface with a           Jimenez F 1989 M e ~ n i c adel billar 1. Movimiento de
constant speed, is due not to the rigidity of the          la bola sobre el tapiz Revisto Esporiola de ffsico 3
 bodies but to the fact that the point of contact of the   31-41
 body with the surface is instantaneously at rest.         McClelland J A C 1991 Friction and related
Therefore, when a deformation is produced, the             phenomena Php. Educ 26 234-7
velocities of the points of contact between the body       Menigaux J 1994 Students' reasonings in solid
 and the surface are not zero, and as a consequence a      mechanics Phys Educ 29 242-6
                                                                                                               181
 N E W APPROACHES

Salazar A, SBnchez-Lavega A and Amandiaga M A          Tabor'D 1994The rolling and skidding of automobile
 1990 Is the frictional force always opposed to the    tyres PhF. Educ 2 9 301-6
motion? Phys. Fduc 25 82-5                             Witters J and Duymelinck D 1986 Rolling and
Shaw D E 1979 Frictional force on rolling objectsAm.   resistive forces on balls moving on a flat surface Am.
J. PhF. 47 887-8                                       .I.P h p 54 80-3
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/sliding_bank_spot_on_the_wall_system.pdf
title: Sliding Bank Spot On The Wall System
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Sliding Bank Spot on the Wall System”                                       ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Recently, Bob Jewett and I created the Video Encyclopedia of One Pocket (VEOP), a 5-volume full-
length instructional video series that covers all the skills, knowledge, strategy, and moves you need to master
this great game.        Complete information, including free online video excerpts, can be found at
DrDaveBilliards.com/VEOP. The series is about one pocket (1P), but many of the shots, techniques, and
principles also apply to many other pool games. In this article, I look at one of the “spot on the wall” systems
presented in Volume IV of VEOP.

    “Spot on the wall” systems are based on finding the point where various lines of aim for different kicks or
banks intersect. If that point is close to a wall, a piece of furniture, another pool table, or some other easy-to-
remember landmark, to aim any kick or bank shot to that pocket, you just need to aim at the corresponding
“spot on the wall.” In my 2011 February article, I showed how the “spot on the wall” system can be used to aim
1-rail, 2-rail and 3-rail kick shots. Video demonstrations can be found in online video NV B.35. In this article, I
cover a system from VEOP-IV for aiming sliding banks, which is demonstrated in online video NV K.2.

    Sliding banks are where the object ball (OB) hits the cushion with stun (no topspin). Therefore, they occur
only at fast speed or when the OB is close to the banking rail, where it doesn’t have time or distance to develop
any forward roll. A good system for aiming sliding banks is the 1/3-more-than-twice system covered in detail
on the resource page at billiards.colostate.edu. Diagram 1 shows the system along with the theoretical “spot
on the wall” point at which all sliding 1-rail banks can be aimed to pocket the ball. The spot is located a little
less than a table width from the long rail close to a line through the short-rail diamonds.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        March, 2023
                        Diagram 1 Theoretical “spot on the wall” for sliding banks

     “Spot on the wall” systems are especially helpful in 1P since we often play on the same table with the same
two corner pockets, so we need to remember only a handful of spots for aiming various types of kick and banks.
You can find the “spot on the wall” at a table by laying out 2 or more standard shot tracks or by finding the lines
of aim that let you pocket balls. Image 1 shows the bank lines for 1/3-more-than-2-to-1, 1/3-more-than-3-to-
1.5, and 1/3-more-than-4-to-2 track lines. Hopefully, there will be a landmark in the room close to this spot.
Here, I’ve placed a bar stool with a paper weight on top to show the exact location of the spot on “the wall.”
Luckily, that large flowery chair never moves, so I can just remember that the spot is just on this side of the
front edge of the arm of the chair. As shown in the video, by aiming at that single spot, I can make banks to
the corner from a wide range of positions. If the room where you play has lots of open space around the table
with no nearby landmarks, the “spot on the wall” system is not as useful, but you can still use it by measuring
off with your cue where the spot should be, then look back to where the OB is, and then find a point on the rail
at which to aim.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        March, 2023
                                             Image 1 Spot on the stool

     In a game, if you have random cue ball (CB) and OB positions, and you know the “spot on the wall,” first
find the required bank line for the OB by aiming it at the spot. Then pivot the cue to the CB with the cue tip at
the ghost ball target to find the required line of aim. Several examples are shown in NV K.2. When there is a
cut angle on the bank, you need to adjust your aim or add gearing outside spin to deal with cut-induced spin-
transfer effects. This is the case with any bank shot aiming system. If you want to learn about that, see the
bank aim adjustment effects resource page at billiards.colostate.edu.

    Check out online video NV K.2 to see a complete demonstration of the topics in this article. Better yet, try
out the system on your table to find the “spot on the wall” in your pool room for each corner pocket. That way,
the next time you have a bank shot, you won’t need to count diamonds, do calculations, or try to visualize the
correct angle of the shot. You just need to aim at the “spot on the wall” and fire away. If you want to learn more
about various useful “spot on the wall” aiming systems, see the resource page at billiards.colostate.edu.
And if you want to learn more about the great game of one-pocket, check out the Video Encyclopedia of One
Pocket (VEOP) at DrDaveBilliards.com.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV B.35 – Corner-5, Plus-2, and one-rail kicks, and “spot on the wall” aiming
   normal video    NV K.2 – Spot on The Wall Aiming System for Sliding Banks, from VEOP-IV

Billiards Digest                                                                                       March, 2023
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
          with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
          to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          March, 2023
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/small_gap_combos.pdf
title: Small Gap Combos
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Small-Gap Combos”                                                            ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles are available at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Do you know how to aim combination shots, where the gap between the two object balls (OBs) is fairly
small? Do you know how and when to account for throw, and do you know when the cut-angle effect is more
important than the throw effect. And do you know the gap size that guarantees the 2nd OB will go straight
over a fairly wide range of cut angles? This article will answer all of these questions.

     Diagram 1 illustrates important terminology related to small-gap combinations, where the cue ball (CB) is
being hit squarely into the 11, sending the 11 along the same line into the 12. If the 11 and 12 were frozen
(gap size = 0), a direct hit on the 12 (incoming angle = 0) would send the 12 straight up table (outgoing angle
= 0). At close to a ½-ball hit between the 11 and 12, again with no gap, where the center of the 11 is aimed at
the edge of the 12, the 12 would head in the throw direction. Throw is largest with a stun shot, where the 1st
ball slides without top or bottom spin into the 2nd ball. Stun is guaranteed for frozen or small-gap combos
since the 1st ball doesn’t have distance or time to develop forward roll before hitting the 2nd ball. Maximum
throw with typical ball conditions is about 1” (2.5 cm) per foot (30.5 cm) of travel. Throw is less at faster
speed and at cut angles thinner or thicker than a ½-ball hit.

                               Diagram 1 Small-gap combination terminology

    When the gap size between the balls is very small (nearly frozen) the 2nd ball reacts much like as with the
frozen-ball case. If the gap size is much larger (for example, 1” or 25 mm), even at a small incoming angle
and slow speed, the cut effect is still larger than the throw effect, and the 12 goes in the cut direction. At large
incoming angles, the 12 can be cut a larger amount (with a large outgoing angle) as the gap size increases.

   So if the 2nd OB throws in one direction when the gap size is really small, and cuts in the other direction
when the gap size is large, there must be a gap size in the middle where the two effects cancel. I did a

Billiards Digest                                                                                        August, 2018
thorough math and physics analysis (TP B.21), and determined that the magical gap size is exactly 3/8” (9.5
mm). Fortunately, 9.5mm is just slightly smaller than the diameter of typical low-CB-deflections shaft, in
which case it is easy to judge the optimal gap size with your tip. Alternatively, you can visualize the gap size
as 1/3 the radius of a ball (1/3 * 1/2 * 2 ¼” = 1/3 * 1/2 * 9/4” = 1/3 * 9/8" = 3/8"). Alternatively, you can
visualize 3/8" as between 1/4" and 1/2", which many people can picture fairly easily.

     As clearly demonstrated in online video NV J.1, with a 3/8” gap size, throw cancels cut very closely over a
fairly wide range of incoming angles, especially at slower speeds. Beyond about a 30º incoming angle (a ½
ball hit between the 11 and 12), the cut effect becomes larger than the throw effect and the 12 heads in the
cut direction.

    Now let’s look at several game-situation examples where an understanding of combo throw effects can
help you make shots and win games. These and many more examples are demonstrated in online video NV
J.1. In Diagram 2, you are playing 8-ball shooting stripes, and the 14 and 15 are frozen with the line of
centers heading well to the left of the corner pocket. However, by hitting the 14 to the right of the line, you
can throw the 15 into the pocket. Here, you only need about half of maximum throw, so hitting the 14 into the
15 with about a ¾-ball hit, twice as full as a ½-ball hit, will provide enough throw to pocket the ball, leading to
an easy out.

                                     Diagram 2 Frozen-ball combo throw

    In Diagram 3, there is about a 3/8” gap between the 14 and 15, and the line of centers heads into the
heart of the side pocket. As mentioned above, because of this gap size, you can hit the 14 over a wide range
of angles and still pocket the 15. If the 9 and 10 were not on the table, a good play would be to hit a little on
the right side of the 14 with stun or slight draw to get position on the 12 down table. With the 9 and 10 cluster
on the table, a better play is to break out the cluster. The natural angle heads in a good direction, so if you hit
on the left side of the 14 with follow, you can pocket the 15 and get the break out for an table clearance.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       August, 2018
                                         Diagram 3 Magical 3/8” gap

      In Diagram 4, there is about a 1” gap between the 11 and 13, so you can easily cut the 13 into the corner
even though the line of centers heads well to the right of the pocket. You need to aim this shot very differently
than a non-combo cut. If you aimed to cut the 13 into the heart of the pocket, not adjusting for throw, you can
miss the shot since the 11 will throw the 13 toward the rail. To pocket this shot (especially on a table with
tight pockets), you need to aim to overcut the 13. If you plan to use fairly slow speed to hold the CB for the 11
in the near side next, you need to compensate for throw quite a bit since throw is maximum for a slow ½-hit
shot with stun. A better approach here might be to use more speed to send the CB off three rails to get
position on the 11 in the opposite side (as shown in Diagram 4). With more speed, you don’t need to
compensate for throw as much, and you won’t need to cut the 11 as thinly, both of which will make the shot a
little easier.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      August, 2018
                                           Diagram 4 Large gap combo cut

   I hope this article helps you better understand throw effects, applied to small-gap combos, so you can
make shots like these and win more games. Here is a quick summary of the important effects to remember:

               •   When the gap between the OBs is 3/8" (9.5mm), the 2nd ball heads very straight (i.e., the throw
                   effect cancels the cut effect) over a fairly wide range of 1st-ball angles.

               •   When the gap between the OBs is very small (much less than 3/8" or 9.5 mm), the 2nd OB heads
                   in the throw direction, with the largest throw occurring close to a ½-ball hit with slow speed.

               •   When the gap between the OBs is larger than 3/8", the 2nd OB always heads in the cut direction;
                   although, throw reduces the cut more at slower speed.

    Online video NV J.1 also demonstrates all of the effects and shots in the article. Check it out when you
get a chance. Like most things, it is better to see it rather than just read about it. Better still, try the shots out
yourself at a table.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.1 – Small-Gap-Combination Throw Effects and Game-Situation Examples
normal video

                    TP B.21 – Small-gap-combination throw effects
technical proof

Billiards Digest                                                                                          August, 2018
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                 August, 2018
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/soft_vs_hard_tip_myth_buster.pdf
title: Soft Vs Hard Tip Myth Buster
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, banks_kicks_rails
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Soft vs. Hard Tip Myth Buster”                                                 ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    I recently posted a series of YouTube videos (NV L.6, NV L.8, and NV L.10) that bust many myths and
misconceptions concerning the performance of soft and hard tips (see Image 1). In this column, I summarize
the main points from the videos. First, here are some basic facts concerning tip hardness effects, all justified
on the “cue tip hardness effects” resource page at billiards.colostate.edu:
         • A hard tip lasts longer and holds its shape better over time, in general.
         • Tip hardness (within the typical range) should not have a direct effect on the amount of spin that
             can be applied.
         • The amount of spin is limited by the tip offset that creates a miscue.
         • A soft tip will give the cue stick a softer “feel” (less impact in grip hand) and have a different sound
             than a hard tip. Some people prefer some sounds and “feels” more than others.
         • Tip hardness (in a typical range) has no practical effect on cue ball (CB) deflection (squirt).
         • Soft tips can become harder with use.
         • A softer tip tends to hold chalk better than a harder tip (especially a phenolic tip), so if one does not
             chalk properly or carefully, a soft tip might offer an advantage.
         • Because a softer tip compresses more during a hit, a softer tip will leave bigger chalk marks on the
             CB, which can cause more-frequent cling/skid/kick (bad hits).
         • The shorter a tip is cut (or worn down with use and shaping), the harder it will play.
         • If a tip is not scuffed (either with a tool or with frequent chalking with a traditional abrasive chalk), it
             will not hold chalk very well, and miscues will be more likely. A harder tip might require more
             attention in this regard.
         • A harder tip has a slightly better hit efficiency (energy transfer) than a softer tip. This will result in
             slightly more CB speed for a given stroke speed. This can provide a slight advantage for draw
             shots, where, where slightly more CB speed will retain slightly more backspin on the way to the
             object ball (OB).
         • If you play in a league that does not allow jump cues, having a harder tip on your playing cue will
             make it easier to jump the ball (especially if the cue is light).
         • If a soft tip is also dense and heavy, it will create more CB deflection.

     The biggest myth busted by the video series is:

                              MYTH: A softer tip can put more spin on the cue ball!

As I clearly demonstrate in the videos, this myth is simply false!

Billiards Digest                                                                                              July, 2023
                                       Image 1 Tip Hardness Video Series

     A softer tip does have less hit efficiency (i.e., more cue speed is required to get the same CB speed) and a
different feel/sound (a softer tip typically dampens the impact a little and the force of the hit isn't felt as strongly);
but when the CB is hit with a given tip offset, and the CB is given the desired speed, there is no difference in
spin between a soft and hard tip. The quality of spin (i.e., the spin-speed ratio) delivered to the CB depends
only on the tip contact-point offset from center. The physics of this is very clear. If anybody doubts this, they
should do a careful and objective experiment (like in my videos) to compare any tips they think would produce
different results. For those who have math and physics backgrounds and are interested, the physics showing
how the spin-to-speed ratio depends only on tip offset from center, even when accounting for tip efficiency, can
be found in online technical proof TP A.30. For a given tip offset from center, the force between the tip and CB
imparts both speed (translation) and spin (rotation) by the same proportion at all cue speeds and for all tip types
(although, both the CB speed and spin will be slightly less at the same proportion for softer tips due to the
slightly lower hit efficiency or energy transfer).

     For a given stroke, because a softer tip will deliver slightly less speed to the CB, slightly more backspin will
wear off on the way to the OB with a draw shot and more sidespin will wear off on the way to the cushion with
a sidespin shot (especially on slow and sticky cloth with slower shot speed). These effects might make it seem
like a softer tip is applying less spin to the CB. On the other hand, if the CB is struck at or below center, where
the CB slides over the cloth, drag action effectively intensifies sidespin, in which case a softer tip might seem
to be applying more spin to the CB. But again, when doing tip comparisons with equal CB speeds, there is no
difference in the amount of spin that is imparted for a given tip offset.

     Some people think that because a soft tip stays in contact with the CB slightly longer, a soft tip can apply
more spin. However, it is more likely that a hard tip has a better chance to impart more spin (for a given CB
speed). During contact, the tip stays on the CB as the ball rotates some, so the final tip offset as the tip leaves
the ball is slightly larger than when the tip first hits the ball. A softer tip, with the longer contact time, will be
farther off center at the end than a harder tip with the same starting offset. If both tips can only hold to a certain
point of offset (at the miscue limit), and you start your shot so the miscue point is barely reached at the end of
contact, the average offset and resulting amount of spin will be larger for the harder tip; although, the difference
is too small to be important over a typical tip hardness range. A "late" or "partial" miscue occurs when the tip
contacts the CB inside the miscue limit but goes outside the miscue limit during the ride on the ball during
contact. An example of this occurred during the testing of the soft tip at the 9:35 point in NV L.6.

Billiards Digest                                                                                                July, 2023
     Contact time is still extremely small with both a soft and hard tip: close to a thousandth of a second (0.001
s). Assuming the CB speed is the same in all comparisons, even though the peak force will be different (more
with the shorter contact time), the amount of momentum (linear and angular) transferred to the CB will still be
the same (because the "impulse" or integral of force over contact time is the same in both cases). Because the
CB doesn't move much (translation or spin) during the extremely small contact time, the only significant factor
is the tip contact point at impact.

     It is possible that a hard tip, especially if it is not holding chalk very well, will have a miscue limit closer to
the center than a soft tip that is holding chalk well. However, if you chalk properly before every shot, and keep
the tip properly maintained, there should be no difference in the miscue limit for soft vs. hard tips. A soft tip
does compress more on the CB, creating a larger contact patch on the ball, but this would provide a benefit
only if the tip is not chalked well. In other words, if a harder tip is not holding chalk well or is not chalked
properly, the smaller contact patch could increase the chances for the contact patch to slip during the hit. But
for a given shot, a smaller contact patch will result in larger contact pressure (force per area) over the smaller
area, which could help the chalk particles dig into the tip and CB surfaces better.

    Psychology also plays an important role. If one thinks a hard tip can't hit as far out on the ball (even if it
can), one might tend to hit with less tip offset from center, which will result in less spin. The mind is a powerful
thing. Also, people tend to believe what they want to believe, regardless of facts or logical reasoning; so if
somebody really wants to believe that a softer tip applies more spin, that is what they will believe.

     Here’s the bottom line: Based on the info and videos on the “cue tip hardness effects” resource page
at billiards.colostate.edu, it doesn’t really matter much what tip hardness you choose. If you think your choice
is the best for you, and you like the way it sounds or “feels,” you will probably play better with it. Although, in
general, a hard tip does offer slight advantages. A typical hard playing-cue tip (but not a break cue phenolic
tip) can apply as much (if not more) spin than a soft tip. If you still don’t believe me, watch online videos NV
L.6, NV L.8, and NV L.10 for clear demonstrations and visual proof.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                     NV L.6 – Cue Tip Contact Myth-Busting Truths in Super Slow Motion
                     NV L.8 – Can a SOFTER TIP Put MORE SPIN on the Ball? — MYTHBUSTING Answers
   normal video      NV L.10 – A Fun CHALLENGE DRILL to Test Your DRAW QUALITY … and SOFT VS. HARD
                         TIP Comparison

                     TP A.30 – The effects of cue tip offset, cue weight, and cue speed on cue ball speed and spin
   technical proof

PS:
      •     I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
            with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
            to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                              July, 2023
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/speed_control.pdf
title: Speed Control
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Speed Control”                                                             ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     Next to pocketing balls and controlling cue ball (CB) direction, speed control is the most important
fundamental of pool. You need to be able to aim and pocket a shot, but you also need to send the CB the
right distance to be able to easily pocket the next ball. The only way to develop and improve your speed
control is through practice and experience, but it can also help to understand some basic principles and
effects. I recently posted an online video (NV J.38) that demonstrates the top 10 tips to help you with your
speed control.. I summarize some of the highlights below.

1. Stun Shot Ball Speeds

     With a stun shot, where the CB is sliding with no top or bottom spin at the object ball (OB), if the shot is
straight, the CB stops in place and delivers all its speed to the OB. This is called a stop shot. As shown in
Image 1 from the video, with a 45° cut-angle stun shot, the CB and OB head at the same angles. And as
demonstrated in the video, the speeds and travel distances are also equal. The video shows a safety
example where this principle comes in really handy.

                           Image 1 Stun shot equal separation angle and speed

2. Stun Shot Ball-Hit Fraction

     With a stun shot, the percentage or fraction of speed the CB loses when hitting the OB is the same as the
ball-hit fraction (BHF), or how much the CB eclipses or overlaps the OB during the hit (see the inset in Image
2). Obviously, when the ball-hit fraction is 0, the CB loses no speed. As demonstrated in the video, with a ¼-
ball hit, the CB loses only a ¼ of its speed when it hits the OB. And with a ½-ball hit, the CB loses ½ of its
speed. The CB loses ¾ of its speed with a ¾-ball hit. And with a full-ball hit, the CB loses all its speed.

3. Rolling CB Ball Equal Angle and Distance

      As shown in Image 2 from the video, with a rolling CB, the ball speeds and distances are the same at a
little less than a ½-ball hit, which is slightly more than a 30° cut angle. And as with the 45° cut stun shot, the
balls also separate at the same angles. As demonstrated in the video, this is useful to know for slow-roll
equal-separation safeties.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        June, 2020
                          Image 2 Rolling CB equal separation angle and speed

4. Straight Rolling CB Ball Travel Distance

     If a rolling CB hits an OB squarely, the OB will travel about 7 times as far as the CB after impact. This
number can vary some with ball and cloth conditions, so be sure to test it out on your table. The balls travel
different distances at different speeds, but the OB always travels 7-times the distance of the CB, neglecting
cushion rebound losses. Because this relationship is constant, it is relatively easy to learn follow-distance
control with a little practice. That’s one reason we often say: “Draw for show … follow for the dough.”

5. Best Tip Height

    For a rolling-ball shot, to help achieve good speed and distance consistency, it is best to hit the CB at
about 20% of the radius above the center (see Image 3). This is the tip height you should use for a lag shot.
With a lag shot, you always want to try to hit the 2nd cushion, which slows the CB giving you a greater margin
for error with shot speed. If you hit the shot a little fast, the CB will still stop close to the rail. But, as
demonstrated in the video, with a similar error in speed on the slow side, the CB ends up much farther from
the rail. Again, with a lag shot, try to reach the 2nd cushion for better results.

                         Image 3 Optimal tip height for rolling CB speed control

6. Use a Shorter Backstroke for Slower Speed

    Probably the most useful speed control advice is to vary your stroke length in proportion to the speed you
want. Smooth acceleration over increasing distances creates increasing speeds. It’s like a car accelerator.
The longer you hold down the pedal, the faster the car goes. In the video, I demonstrate follow and draw
shots of increasing stroke length to control CB speed. I use the same tip position for each of the shots. You
want to use the same non-rushed and smooth acceleration each stroke length. Varying the stroke length with
a consistent stroke style will give you good speed control accuracy and consistency. Try it.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     June, 2020
7. Finish the Stroke

      Another important tip is to make sure you finish your stroke. If you decelerate into the CB, it will be very
difficult to control CB speed. Instead, accelerate smoothly through the ball for better accuracy and
consistency. Also, with finesses shots, don’t use a long stroke and try to push the cue forward with a constant
speed. You will generally have much better control with a short, smoothly accelerating stroke. With a short
stroke length, you can use a shorter bridge length to help prevent a longer stroke if necessary. This can also
help reduce stroking error if your stroke is not very straight.

8. Plan Patterns and Position Play Smartly

    There are also some useful speed-control principles related to position and pattern play. When possible,
you want to try to avoid crossing the line of the next shot. Crossing the line reduces your margin for error with
shot speed, especially if you are crossing the narrow part of the shape zone. Instead, try to come into the line
and wide part of the shape zone for the next shot as shown in Image 4. This will give you a much larger
margin for error with shot speed.

    Another important pattern-play strategy is to try to minimize CB motion. If the CB doesn’t move very
much, it is much easier to predict the final position more accurately. If the CB travels a longer distance,
especially off cushions, it is much more difficult to be accurate and consistent with both direction and
distance.

    Another important position control principle is to use the rails as your friends. As shown in the video,
don’t try to finesse a shot well short of a cushion. It is very easy to overrun shots like this and get too close to
the cushion. I know I said earlier it is best to limit CB travel, but sometimes it is much better to go straight into
and off a cushion. Because the cushion slows the CB by about half, this gives you twice the margin for error
with shot speed.

                       Image 4 Coming into the line and shape zone of the next shot

9. Speed Consistency and Control Drills

     A good way to develop and improve your speed consistency and control is to work on speed control drills.
The simplest drill is to hit the CB straight down the table to different target distances. Vary your stroke length
for the distance you want and hit the CB 20% above its center for the best control. If you land within a
diamond on either side of your target, consider that good. As you increase the speed to come off cushions,
you will need to add much more speed to get the desired distance since the cushions absorb energy.

    Image 5 is from a good drill to test your finesse speed control and consistency. Set up 10 balls across
the head string and hit them in order straight up the table, sending each only far enough pass the previous

Billiards Digest                                                                                           June, 2020
ball. The goal is to hit as many balls as you can before reaching the end cushion. Start by hitting the 1 as
softly as possible with a very short stroke. This drill is tougher than you might think. After the 10, if you
haven’t reached the end cushion yet, bring earlier balls back to the head string to continue. In the video, I
was able to hit 12 before reaching the end cushion, which is pretty good. How many you can get? Keep
track of your scores to see how you improve over time.

                                                 Image 5 Finesse drill

10. Position-Play Speed Control Drills

    To master the speed control required in most game situations, it helps to practice speed control for a wide
range of shot types. The Billiard University (BU) playing-ability exams contains some excellent drills for
position play speed control. Drills F2-F5 and F8 in BU Exam I, and drill S5 in BU Exam II will test and help
you develop and improve your skills. Again, track your drill scores to see how you improve over time. The
Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP) also includes a wide assortment of scored speed-control drills to
help you develop and improve your skills.

     Again, everything in this article is demonstrated in online video NV J.38. Be sure to watch the video and
try out the drills the next time you practice. If you want more information, links to many supporting resources
can be found in the YouTube video description. Have fun with the drills.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.38 – Top 10 Speed Control Tips and Drills
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        June, 2020
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/spin_transfer_throw.pdf
title: Spin Transfer Throw
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Spin Transfer Throw”                                                        ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     Recently on AZBilliards.com, there was a discussion and debate about how sidespin can be used to throw
a frozen combination with transferred spin. Matt Polland shared the illustration in Image 1 clearly showing all
possible effects at play with a straight hit into a frozen combination. With right spin on the cue ball (CB), which
way do you think the 2nd object ball (OB) will head? Straight, to the left, or to the right? Think about it as you
read on. Recently, I posted online video NV L.56 to discuss and demonstrate all the effects separately. The
video starts with some useful game-situation examples from Part 2 of my “Everything You Need to Know About
Throw” video series (NV J.42), which shows how important throw is when shooting frozen combo shots. If you
have not seen the throw video yet, check it out since it has useful background information and examples.

                                Image 1 Frozen-ball CIT, SIS, and SIT effects

Billiards Digest                                      1                                                August, 2024
     Now let’s look at each effect in Image 1, starting with throw of a single ball. For the shot shown in Image
2, with a center-ball hit and straight shot, the 11 heads straight up table and the stripe remains vertical as the
ball rolls. But with a cut angle, again with a center-ball hit, the OB gets thrown well offline (see Image 3). This
is called cut-induced throw or CIT. It is maximum for a slow-speed stun shot close to a half-ball hit. Friction
between the balls throws the 11 offline in the direction of CB motion (along the red line in Image 3). With a cut
in the other direction, the ball throws in the other direction; again, in the direction the CB is heading. As is clear
in online video NV L.56, the stripe wobbles with each throw shot. Anytime there is throw, the throwing force
also imparts sidespin to the thrown ball. CB rubbing to the left causes left or CW sidespin on the OB … and
CB rubbing to the right causes right or CCW sidespin on the OB.

                                               Image 2 GoPro view

                                       Image 3 Cut-induced throw (CIT)

Billiards Digest                                        2                                                 August, 2024
     Throw caused by sidespin instead is called spin-induced throw or SIT. For a straight shot, it is maximum
with slow-speed stun at about half of maximum sidespin. See the “maximum throw” resource page at
billiards.colostate.edu for more information and demonstrations. Left spin throws the OB to the right, in the
direction the CB is rubbing, and right spin instead throws the OB to the left. Note that with an accurate aim at
the desired ghost-ball position, the CB drifts sideways in the opposite direction from the throw. As demonstrated
in online video NV L.56, to get the CB to stop in place, you need to cut the OB to counteract the throw effect
on the CB.

     Now let’s look at frozen-combination throw for the shot in Image 4. With a straight center-ball hit, the 2nd
ball goes straight. But hitting the 1st ball at an angle causes the 2nd ball to throw. Remember, throw is always
in the direction the 1st ball is rubbing against the 2nd. If the 9 is going to the right, the 11 gets thrown to the
right, and if the 9 is going to the left, the 11 gets thrown to the left. Again, when you watch the video, notice the
stripe wobble caused by the sidespin imparted to the OB by the throwing force.

                                 Image 4 Frozen-combo spin-induced throw

     Well, are you now ready to accurately answer the question from the beginning of the column? With right
spin on the CB, which way do you think the 2nd OB will head? Straight, to the left, or to the right? Choose your
answer before reading on. … As shown in online video NV L.56, with right spin, the 2nd OB throws to the
right. And with left spin, it throws to the left. With right spin, the CB throws the 1st OB to the left with SIT, but
it also transfers left spin to the 1st OB. This spin throws the 2nd OB to the right. In the video, you will notice
that the amount of throw is not very much. This is because there is a limit to how much spin can be transferred
from the CB to the 1st OB. Also, the CIT effect that moves the 1st OB to the left reduces the effective throwing
motion caused by the left spin. But right spin on the CB does throw the 2nd OB to the right. Did you get the
correct answer?

     If your only goal is to throw the 2nd OB, cutting the 1st ball in to the 2nd is much more effective than trying
to use spin transfer. As shown in the video, you can throw the ball a large amount with this approach.
Remember, to get the most throw, you want to aim the center of the 1st ball at the edge of the 2nd ball for a
half-ball hit on the 2nd ball. And use slow speed.

     Image 5 shows an example 8-ball game situation, shooting stripes with the 9 and 11 frozen, where the
spin-transfer-throw technique can be helpful. As shown in the video, the 11 goes wide of the pocket with a
straight hit. If the 1 weren’t there, you could just cut the 9 into the 11 to get more than enough CIT to pocket
the ball. However, with the 1 there, the only reliable option is to use the small spin-transfer-throw effect.
Remember, you need left spin to throw the 2nd ball to the left slightly. The technique allows you to pocket the
ball here; but, in general, the technique is not very useful since a situation like this is rare and the amount of
throw you can get is very small, even with pocket speed. In the video, I hit the shot very well and still barely
got enough throw to pocket the ball. But if the technique can help you win a game, like in this situation, it is
worthwhile to know.

Billiards Digest                                       3                                                 August, 2024
                            Image 5 8-ball example using spin-induced frozen throw

    I hope the info and examples here and in online videos NV J.42 and NV L.56 will help you be more effective
when you need to throw balls in. If you want to learn more about throw and spin transfer, see the resource
pages linked in the video descriptions of the YouTube videos. Be sure to watch the videos. It is very helpful to
see the shots instead of just reading about them. And better yet, try the shots out at a table.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV J.42 – Top 10 Things You Need to Know about THROW
   normal video    NV L.56 – Spin Transfer Throw of Frozen Balls – with GoPro POV

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                         4                                                August, 2024
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/squirt_part_i_introduction.pdf
title: Squirt Part I Introduction
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Squirt – Part I: introduction”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article help you locate the resources on the website. If you
have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources
from a CD-ROM or DVD. See the website for details.

    This is the first article in a series dealing with “squirt.” Squirt, also called deflection or cue
ball deflection, refers to the angular change in the initial cue ball (CB) direction due to an off-
center hit. Diagram 1 illustrates the effect. When the CB is hit off center, to impart English
(sidespin), in addition to the large force in the aiming line direction, there is also a small sideways
force that pushes the CB off line. In other words, the CB does not go where you are aiming. The
squirt angle is a measure of how much the deflected cue-ball path differs from the aiming-line
direction. I prefer the term “squirt” to “deflection,” because when talking about a “low-deflection”
shaft, things can be confusing. A “low squirt” shaft produces less “CB deflection” than an average
shaft; but the end of the cue stick, because it is lighter than normal cues, actually deflects more
after impact with the CB (e.g., see HSV A.109). So a low-squirt shaft produces smaller CB
deflection, but it results in larger cue stick deflection. That’s why I think the term “deflection” can
be confusing when discussing cue sticks.

                       large cue force
                   in aiming line direction                 deflected
                                                         cue ball motion

                                                           aiming line              squirt
                                                                                    angle
                             small sideways force

                                              Diagram 1 Squirt

                    HSV A.109 – English and squirt for a Predator Z shaft at fast speed and
high-speed video    increasing offsets

    Diagram 2 visually illustrates the physics behind squirt. The photographs are stills from a
high-speed video shot by the Billiard SportKlub Union out of Austria (www.bskunion.at). The
footage was shot with a very expensive camera capable of full-color, high-resolution, video at
2000 frames per second. That’s over 60 times faster than a normal video camera. The full video
can be viewed at HSV A.76a. The stills in Diagram 2 are impressive, but you really should view
the video online to appreciate the full effect. Still “a” is just before contact. Stills “b” through “e”
represent a little less than 0.001 second (one thousandth of a second) during which the tip is in
contact with the ball. In still “f” the tip hasn’t fully recovered from the compression yet as the CB
is separating. Still “g” is after separation. The line and arc appearing in each still mark the initial
cue stick and CB positions. Notice how much the cue tip deflects away (down in the diagram)
from its original line of action. Also notice how much the cue tip deforms (e.g., see still “d”). Isn’t
it amazing that the tip can take this much abuse and still return to its original shape, shot after
shot? Those leather tips, which haven’t changed much in 200 years, are quite resilient.

                   (a)                                                              (b)

                   (c)                                                              (d)

                   (e)                                                              (f)

                                 (g)

                    Diagram 2 High-speed video stills showing cause for squirt

                   HSV A.76a – close-up of tip during off-center hit
high-speed video

     The black arrows in still “c” of Diagram 2 illustrate the effect that causes squirt. While the tip
is in contact with the ball, the ball starts rotating. This rotation (counterclockwise in the diagram)
pushes the cup tip down a little during contact. Because the end of the shaft has mass, it takes
force to move the end of the shaft down as the ball rotates. Isaac Newton said: “for every action,
there is an equal and opposite reaction;” therefore, if the tip is being pushed down by the ball, the
tip will push back with an equal and opposite force on the ball. This force (see Diagram 1 again)
is what causes squirt. Regardless of how good the tip is or how well it is chalked, there will
always be sideways motion that will result in squirt. The only way to reduce the amount of squirt
is to reduce the amount of shaft end-mass so there is less inertia to support (and create) the
sideways force. That's how low-squirt cues work: less end-mass = less sideways force = less
squirt.
      Another thing to notice in Diagram 2 is the huge cloud of chalk that forms during impact. The
tip actually had more chalk than necessary, as evidenced by the trail of chalk particles visible in
still “a,” even before the tip hits the ball. However, even with a small amount of chalk on the tip,
much of the chalk leaves the tip during the shock associate with the collision between the tip and
the ball. That’s why it is important to chalk before ever shot. That’s also why it is important to
vacuum your table periodically. All of that abrasive chalk dust settles into the cloth and makes
everything (cloth, balls, and slate) wear faster.

     When using English, squirt isn’t the only effect you need to consider. Diagram 3 illustrates
all of the effects that come into play when using English. When you strike the CB off center, the
CB squirts away from the aiming line (see NV 4.13 and NV A.17). In other words, it doesn’t go
where the stick is aiming. The amount of squirt increases with the amount of tip offset from
center. The CB also swerves (curves) on its way to the OB (see NV 4.14 and NV 7.12). The
amount of swerve depends on cue stick elevation, shot speed, and distance between the CB and
object ball (OB). Finally, the OB gets thrown off the impact line (AKA “line of centers”) on its way
to the target (see NV 4.15, NV 4.16, and NV A.21). As we saw in my previous series of articles,
the amount of throw varies with cut angle, speed, top/bottom spin, and the amount and type of
English. If you don’t compensate your aim for squirt, swerve, and throw when playing pool (either
consciously or sub-consciously), you will never be a great player. Obviously, the amount you
need to compensate varies with ball and table conditions, so you also need to be good at
adjusting from one set of conditions to another.

                                                                                   throw
                                               squirt    thrown OB
                                                                                   angle
                                               angle      direction
                                initial
                             CB direction
                                                                                 impact
                                                                                   line

               typical cue                                                  right
                elevation                   aiming         curved       English (spin)
                              right
                             English          line        CB path          on CB
                                                          (swerve)

                                       Diagram 3 All English effects

                    NV 4.13 – Squirt due to high speed English
                    NV 4.14 – English curve due to an elevated cue
                    NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
                    NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video        NV 7.12 – Small-curve massé shot
                    NV A.17 – English deflection (squirt) vs. speed
                    NV A.21 – Bank shot using throw and spin transfer

     Diagram 4 illustrates an important distinction when considering squirt. Swerve tends to
cancel the effects of squirt. The swerve effect increases with slower speeds and with higher cue
stick elevation. The net effect of both squirt and swerve is what I call “effective squirt.” This is
how much the CB gets shifted on its way to the OB. For some shots with English, if the amount
of English, cue stick elevation, speed, and shot distance is right, the effective squirt can actually
be zero (i.e., no aim adjustment is required). The effective squirt can also be negative with higher
cue stick elevations (e.g., as with massé shots), where swerve is much larger than the squirt
effect. I suspect many people really mean “effective squirt” when they use the term “squirt.” Here
are some typical statements that make me believe this: “Shot speed affects squirt a lot.” or “Draw
shots squirt less than follow shots.” These and other statements apply to “effective squirt” but not
to “pure squirt.” We will look at these and other effects more in future months.

     People who have performed squirt tests with cue-testing robots (e.g., Predator’s “Iron Willy”
and Meucci’s “Myth Destroyer”) also measure “effective squirt,” and not pure squirt. The reason
for this is the robots are mounted to pool tables and the cue stick has elevation to clear the rails,
and the squirt is measured over a large distance on the table. The problem with this is the results
depend on shot speed and the cloth friction. It would be better to build a horizontal cue-stick
squirt tester so swerve would not be an issue (i.e., shot speed and cloth friction would not affect
the results). Then, “pure squirt” could be measured easily and directly. I am actually in the
process of working with some students to design and build such a system. Hopefully, I’ll be able
to report some results by the end of the year.

                                                               initial CB
                         "pure" squirt
                            angle                              direction
                                                                               "effective"
                                                                                 squirt
                                                                                distance

                                     aiming            curved CB path
                                       line             due to swerve

                                    Diagram 4 Effective squirt

     Over the next few months we will see how “pure squirt” and “effective squirt” vary with speed,
follow, draw, and cue stick elevation. We’ll also look at aim compensation techniques used to
adjust for squirt. Finally, we’ll look at low-squirt cues and the effects of tip size and shape. I hope
you look forward to rest of the series.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS: I know other authors and I tend to use a lot of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, cling, stun,
impact line, 30 degree rule, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms.
If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the glossary
in my book. For convenience, an electronic copy is posted online in the “Instructor and Student
Resources” section of my website.

PS: If you want even more background information on squirt, you can refer to Bob Jewett’s 2002
August-October BD articles and Ron Shepard’s 2001 technical paper on the topic. Both of these
resources can be access from my website (in the “Physics Resources” section).

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/squirt_part_ii_experimental_results.pdf
title: Squirt - Part II: experimental results
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills, robotics_and_computation
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                                  ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Squirt – Part II: experimental results”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article help you locate the resources on the website. If you
have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources
from a CD-ROM or DVD. See the website for details.

     This is the second article in a series dealing with “squirt.” So far, we have looked at basic
terminology and the physics behind squirt. To refresh your memory, squirt, also called
deflection, refers to the angular change in the initial cue ball (CB) direction due to an off-center
hit. In other words, when you use English, the CB doesn’t go where you are aiming because of
squirt. For more background information, see my August ’07 article and refer to NV 4.13 and NV
A.17. When using English, it is also important to be aware of the effects of swerve (see NV 4.14
and NV 7.12) and throw (see NV 4.15, NV 4.16, NV A.21, and my August ’06 through July ’07
articles). Sometimes, the term “effective squirt” is used to refer to the net effect of both squirt
and swerve on the shift in the CB position at object ball (OB) impact (see my August ’07 article for
more information). If you want to refer back to any of my past articles, they are all available on
my website (billiards.colostate.edu).
               NV 4.13 – Squirt due to high speed English
               NV 4.14 – English curve due to an elevated cue
               NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
               NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video   NV 7.12 – Small-curve massé shot
               NV A.17 – Effective squirt vs. speed
               NV A.21 – Bank shot using throw and spin transfer

    This month, I want to share the results of some experiments I performed recently to
demonstrate if and how much squirt varies with tip offset (English) and shot speed. Diagram 1
shows the experimental setup used. A template (available in the “Instructor and Student
Resources” section of my website) is taped to the table. The template has markings for CB
position, lines for tip offset and aiming alignment, and a grid for measuring the amount of squirt
over a short distance. Clear transparency film (used on overhead projectors) is taped over the
paper template to provide a smoother surface. The film is also sprayed and wiped with silicone
spray to further reduce friction. Bob Jewett and I came up with this idea one day on the phone
when we were discussing how to reduce the effects of swerve is squirt-measurement
experiments. Thanks Bob! Because the measurement is taken over such a short distance and
because the friction between the plastic and ball (also sprayed and wiped with silicone) is so
small, the effects of swerve are practically non-existent.
                         high-speed video equipment
                                                                   Dr. Dave's pool robot

         view of
        template
       on monitor                                                                             tripod
                                                                                               with
                                                                                             camera
                                                                                             directly
   squirt and speed                                                                           above
template covered with                                                                       template
 transparency plastic
     and sprayed
     with Silicone

        Diagram 1 Experimental setup used to accurately measure speed and squirt

     Continuing with Diagram 1, a Jim Rempe CB was used because its many markings help line
up the shot and the amount of tip offset consistently. Also, the exact amount of tip offset can
easily be measured after a shot by observing where the chalk mark is on the ball relative to the
markings. High-speed video equipment (running at 1000 frames/sec) is used to visually see
where the CB crosses the squirt measurement grid. The camera is mounted on a tripod directly
above the template grid (see the image on the monitor). The high-speed camera requires bright
lighting. Two 500W Halogen lamps were used (not shown), hence the need for the sunglasses
on the shooting “robot.” Sunscreen on the arms is also recommended. The “robot” is Dave
Gross, a top regional player with a very repeatable stroke.

     For the experiment, shots were taken at three different offsets (small, medium, and large
amount of English) with three different speeds (slow, medium, and fast). Three trials were done
for each offset and speed for a total of 27 shots. Shots that didn’t feel right to the shooter were
discarded, and those shots were re-done. The cue stick used was a 21oz Players XIX with a
12.75 mm tip. I chose this cue because it was the largest-squirt cue I had available in my
collection, other than my break stick. Diagram 2 shows the results of the experiment. The plot
shows how squirt angle varied with shot speed for the three different tip offsets. Obviously, the
amount of squirt increases with the amount of tip offset. This is clear from the large-offset curve
being much higher than the small- and medium-offset curves. Notice how the medium- and
large- offset curves are very flat, indicating that the amount of squirt does not vary with speed, as
many people think (in fact, I used to think this also). Honestly, I can’t explain why the small-offset
curve has a slight up-trend and the other curves don’t. This could imply that swerve might have
been a factor. At higher speeds, there would be less swerve and more effective squirt. Because
we did the small-offset shots first, maybe the silicone spray was not as plentiful and well
distributed on the plastic; although, I did re-apply and wipe before each set of runs. Before I
decided to use the silicone spray on the plastic and ball, the amount of effective squirt increased
significantly for higher speeds for all offsets, because swerve was a bigger factor for the slower-
speed shots.
                                                        Squirt vs. Speed

                                  3.0

                                  2.5
               squirt (degrees)
                                                                               large offset (0.51")
                                  2.0
                                                    medium offset (0.36")
                                  1.5

                                  1.0

                                                                               small offset (0.21")
                                  0.5

                                  0.0
                                        2.0       4.0         6.0        8.0           10.0           12.0

                                                              speed (mph)

                                          Diagram 2 Squirt vs. speed for different offsets

    Another possible explanation for the slight up-trend in the small-offset curve in Diagram 2 is
human shooter error. Although, I doubt my “pool robot” introduced any significant error. He is a
top regional player and his stroke is very reliable. However, I will reserve judgment until I can run
some tests in the future with a mechanical stoking machine that I am currently building. This
machine will be capable of a perfectly straight and repeatable stroke at controlled speeds, and
the stick will be mounted horizontally over a simulated table so swerve will not be a factor
whatsoever. Swerve occurs only with an elevated cue; and at a pool table, the cue stick is
always elevated a little to clear the rails. I look forward to using my mechanical “robot” in the
future. Until then, I’ll need to continue to use the human shown in Diagram 1.

    Diagram 3 illustrates how much squirt can affect a shot. The shot on top is for a large tip-
offset (about 100% English, at 0.5 inch tip offset) hit with the Players cue mentioned above. The
bottom shot is for a Predator Z-shaft for comparison. As shown in Diagram 2, the Players cue
had a squirt of about 2.5º for the large tip-offset. We performed similar tests with a Predator Z-
shaft and measured a squirt of about 1.8º for the same tip-offset. As you can see in the diagram,
the actual final CB position on the right is significantly off from the aiming line target. The squirt
and CB deflection are less for the low-squirt cue (about 30% less), but the effect is still significant.
For large tip-offset shots, squirt can result in several inches of CB deflection in a long shot.
Obviously, one needs to adjust one’s aim quite a bit to compensate for this effect (more on this in
a future article). I think an important message from Diagram 3 is to think twice before using
English on a long shot or with a large cut angle where accuracy is critical.
                                                                    CB deflection =
                                   fast                       required aiming adjustment
                                   medium
                                   slow
                                                                           2.5º

                 typical cue                           aiming line

                                                                          smaller deflection
                                                                           and adjustment
                                                                           1.8º

               low-squirt cue

                        Diagram 3 Squirt for typical and low-squirt cues

     Note that the effects of swerve are not shown in Diagram 3. For a fast shot, and with slick
cloth and/or a new, clean, polished, and/or silicone-sprayed CB, this is appropriate because there
will be very little swerve. However, for slower speed shots under typical playing conditions,
swerve would certainly be a significant factor on a long shot like this. With right English, squirt is
to the left and swerve would curve the CB back to the right some reducing the effective squirt (CB
deflection) at the target. In fact, it is possible for swerve to completely cancel or even reverse the
amount of effective squirt for certain speeds and shot distances. In other words, with slow
enough speed (and enough cue stick elevation), swerve could cause the CB to curve to the right
of the target, instead of to the left (due to squirt alone) as shown in Diagram 3.

    I hope you are enjoying and learning from my series on squirt. Next month, we’ll look at the
effects of follow and draw on squirt and effective squirt. I hope you look forward to rest of the
series.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS: I know other authors and I tend to use a lot of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, cling, stun,
tangent line, 30º rule, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you
ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the glossary in my
book. For convenience, an electronic copy is posted online in the “Instructor and Student
Resources” section of my website.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/squirt_part_iii_follow_draw_squirt_and_swerve.pdf
title: Squirt - Part III: follow/draw squirt and swerve
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                  ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Squirt – Part III: follow/draw squirt and swerve”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article help you locate the resources on the website. If you
have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources
from a CD-ROM or DVD. See the website for details.

    This is the third article in a series dealing with “squirt.” So far, we have looked at basic
terminology, the physics behind squirt, and some experimental results. To refresh your memory,
squirt, also called deflection, refers to the angular change in the initial cue ball (CB) direction
due to an off-center hit. In other words, when you use English, the CB doesn’t go where you are
aiming because of squirt. For more background information, see my August ’07 article and refer
to NV 4.13 and NV A.17. When using English, it is also important to be aware of the effects of
swerve (see NV 4.14 and NV 7.12) and throw (see NV 4.15, NV 4.16, NV A.21, and my August
’06 through July ’07 articles). Sometimes, the term “effective squirt” is used to refer to the net
effect of both squirt and swerve on the shift in the CB position at object ball (OB) impact (see my
August ’07 article for more information). If you want to refer back to any of my past articles, they
are all available on my website (billiards.colostate.edu).
                  NV 4.13 – Squirt due to high speed English
                  NV 4.14 – English curve due to an elevated cue
                  NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
                  NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video      NV 7.12 – Small-curve massé shot
                  NV A.17 – Effective squirt vs. speed
                  NV A.21 – Bank shot using throw and spin transfer

    This month, we’ll look at the effects of follow and draw on squirt, swerve, and effective squirt.
Diagram 1 illustrates how swerve and effective squirt differ for follow and draw shots. With a
draw shot, the CB slides along the cloth longer before the CB begins to roll in a straight line. With
a follow shot, the ball stops sliding and begins to roll much sooner. Because swerve occurs only
while the ball is sliding, a draw shot persists longer along the initial squirt line, and the swerve
happens more gradually. The end result is: a follow shot will have less effective squirt than a
draw shot of the same amount of tip offset. For more details and a further explanation on this,
see page 7 of TP A.19.

                  TP A.19 – Masse shot aiming method, and curved cue ball paths
technical proof
                                          same squirt angle
                                        and initial CB direction
                                            for both shots
 follow shot        draw shot
                                                                                  the draw shot
                                                                                   has a larger
                                                                                 "effective" squirt

      typical cue         aiming     the follow shot         the draw shot
       elevation
                            line   swerves and begins        slides longer,
                                      to roll sooner      delaying the swerve

               Diagram 1 Squirt and “effective squirt” for draw and follow shots

     Recently, I ran a few experiments to verify all of the claims in Diagram 1. When I first
performed squirt experiments with draw and follow shots (see last month’s article for a description
of the experimental setup and procedures), I was getting different squirt results for follow and
draw shots. In one experiment, I was getting average draw squirt values of 2.4° and average
follow squirt values of 1.9°, using the same tip offset and speed for both shots. However, this
was before I discovered the effectiveness of Silicone spray. After Bob Jewett and I had a
conversation about all of the possible reasons for differences in squirt between draw and follow
shots, we came up with the idea to redo the experiments, with the CB and plastic surface (over
the table cloth) sprayed with Silicone spray. This practically eliminates swerve as a factor,
especially over the relatively short distance of my experiment’s measurement. With swerve out of
the picture, I measured identical average values (2.5°) for squirt for both the draw and follow
shots. So the squirt angle is the same for both draw and follow shots; but as shown in Diagram 1,
the effective squirt (after swerve comes into play) can be much larger for draw shots vs. follow
shots.

     Diagram 2 shows what would happen if the CB were struck with a perfectly level cue, or if
there were no friction between the ball and the cloth. In either of these cases, swerve would not
be a factor at all, and the CB would head perfectly straight in the initial squirt direction.
Unfortunately, neither of these situations is realistic at a pool table. The cue stick is always
elevated some because the back of the cue needs to clear over the rails, and even if the cue was
not over a rail, your grip hand would need some clearance above the table. You can contrive
shots where you can create a level cue, but these shots would not be very practical in a typical
game of pool. Having said all of that, it is useful to know to keep the cue stick as level as
possible to limit the amount of swerve of a shot. The ball and cloth conditions also affect swerve.
With a new, clean, smooth, and polished CB on a very slick cloth, the swerve will be delayed and
the CB will head along the initial squirt line longer before curving, and the curving will take place
more gradually. In my experiments, I was able to simulate the super slick conditions with the
Silicone spray, mostly eliminating swerve as a factor. The result was equal squirt angles and
straight-line CB motion (over a short distance) for follow, draw, and stun shots (of equal horizontal
tip offset). A final factor that can limit swerve is shot speed. As implied in Diagram 2, if faster
speed is used, swerve won’t be much of an effect (especially over shorter distances), as
compared to squirt.
                         or
                                                                                      same squirt
           follow shot         draw shot                                             for both shots
                                                        no swerve

                                                                              fast
                                    or       super slick        or            medium
                   level cue                ball and cloth                    slow

                                         Diagram 2 Swerve-free squirt

     Diagram 3 shows the effects of speed and cue stick elevation on swerve. In shot “A,” the
cue is elevated the typical amount (not very much), and fast speed is used. Here, the squirt
dominates, and the swerve reduces the effective squirt but doesn’t bring the CB back to the
original aiming line. In Shot “B,” the cue stick is elevated a little more than normal, and a slower
speed is used. In this case, the swerve exactly cancels the squirt (for a certain shot distance).
The final CB position is exactly on the aiming line (i.e., the CB went exactly where the shooter
was aiming, which is very unusual when English is used). For a given shot distance and for a
given amount of English and for a given cue stick, there are always certain combinations of
speeds and cue stick elevations that will result in zero effective squirt, but all of this is difficult to
judge reliably. We’ll talk more about aim-compensation techniques in a future article.

                                                                            shot "A"
                                                                     fast
                                                                     medium
                                                                                       typical cue
                                                                     slow
                                                                                        elevation
                                 same initial
    bottom-right                squirt direction
                                                                                                          fast
      English
                                                                                                          medium
                                                                                                          slow

                                                       fast
                                                                                                     slightly higher
                                                                                                     cue elevation
                                                       medium
                                                       slow
                                                                     elevated cue
                                                                                                       shot "B"

                                                              shot "C"

                 Diagram 3 The effects of speed and cue elevation on swerve

   Some people claim that squirt is not a factor in their game. Well, if you don’t use English
much, that might be true. Or if you have years of successful experience and have reliable and
subconscious intuition for automatically compensating your aim, maybe you never need to think
about squirt and swerve. Another possible explanation (although, also unlikely) is that you are
good at using cue elevation and speed to have squirt and swerve cancel on shots where you use
English. Whatever you think, if you don’t appropriately compensate for squirt and swerve
(consciously or subconsciously), you will miss some shots, even if you are using a low-squirt cue
(to minimize squirt) and near-level cue elevation (to minimize swerve).

    Shot “C” in Diagram 3 is called a massé shot, because the cue stick is elevated much higher
than normal and the swerve effect dominates (e.g., see NV 7.11). Here, the CB curves well past
the original aiming line, opposite from the squirt direction. If you want to learn more about masse
shot aiming and speed effects, see my November ’05 article.

                  NV 7.11 –- Large curve massé shot
normal video

   I hope you are enjoying and learning from my series on squirt. Next month, we’ll look at
back-hand English, front-hand English, and pivot-point calibration. I hope you look forward to the
remainder of the series.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS: If you are interested in the math and physics behind squirt, you might want to check out an
analysis I recently posted on my website (see TP A.31).

                  TP A.31 – The physics of squirt
technical proof

PS: I know other authors and I tend to use a lot of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, cling, stun,
tangent line, 30º rule, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you
ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the glossary in my
book. For convenience, an expanded electronic copy is posted online in the “Instructor and
Student Resources” section of my website.

PS: I just released a new DVD called “High-speed Video Magic.” It features billiards, but it also
includes stupid human and animal tricks, balloons popping and bouncing, things breaking,
engineering stuff, toy physics, and fluids and foods in motion. For more information and video
excerpts, see the website (billiards.colostate.edu).

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/squirt_part_iv_bhe_fhe_and_pivot_length_calibration.pdf
title: Squirt Part Iv BHE FHE And Pivot Length Calibration
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                  ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Squirt – Part IV: BHE, FHE, and pivot-length calibration”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article help you locate the resources on the website. If you
have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources
from a CD-ROM or DVD. See the website for details.

     This is the fourth article in my series dealing with “squirt.” So far, we have looked at basic
terminology, the physics behind squirt, some experimental results, and the effects of follow and
draw on squirt, swerve, and effective squirt. To refresh your memory, squirt, also called
deflection, refers to the angular change in the initial cue ball (CB) direction due to an off-center
hit. In other words, when you use English, the CB doesn’t go where you are aiming because of
squirt. For more background information, see my August ’07 article and refer to NV 4.13 and NV
A.17. When using English, it is also important to be aware of the effects of swerve (see NV 4.14
and NV 7.12) and throw (see NV 4.15, NV 4.16, NV A.21, and my August ’06 through July ’07
articles). Sometimes, the phrase “effective squirt” or the term “squerve” is used to refer to the
net effect of both squirt and swerve on the shift in the CB position at object ball (OB) impact (see
my August ’07 article for more information). If you want to refer back to any of my past articles,
they are all available on my website (billiards.colostate.edu).
                NV 4.13 – Squirt due to high speed English
                NV 4.14 – English curve due to an elevated cue
                NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
                NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video    NV 7.12 – Small-curve massé shot
                NV A.17 – Effective squirt vs. speed
                NV A.21 – Bank shot using throw and spin transfer

     This month, we’ll look at methods for adjusting your aim to compensate for squirt. Before I
start, I want to be clear that the methods presented here compensate only for squirt, and don’t
directly take into account swerve and throw. It is assumed that you are already adjusting your
aim for swerve and throw, if they are significant for a given shot. If you are using fast speed
and/or if the CB is close to the OB, and if the cue is near level, swerve will not be much of a
factor. Also, if the balls are clean, smooth, and polished, throw effects will be much smaller than
normal. But just remember that the techniques presented here for squirt compensation assume
swerve and throw are either small or already considered in one’s aim. Good players have solid
intuition built from years of successful practice and experience that helps them adjust their aim
(consciously or subconsciously) to account for squirt, swerve, and throw. If your intuition is not as
good as that of a top player, the techniques in this article might be useful.

    Diagram 1 illustrates a fairly well known method for squirt compensation called back-hand
English (BHE), also known as the “aim and pivot” method. Diagram 1a shows what happens if
you don’t compensate for squirt ... the CB doesn’t go where the cue is aiming. To correct for this,
you can first aim the shot by lining up the tip at the center of the CB (see Diagram 1b). Then you
pivot the cue on your bridge the amount necessary to achieve the desired amount of English. If
the bridge pivot point is in the right place for the given cue, the amount of pivot can exactly cancel
the amount of squirt, and the CB will head in the desired direction (see Diagram 1c). That’s the
good news. The bad news is that every cue has a different natural pivot point. Also, the required
pivot-point location might not be at a comfortable bridge length for you. A method to find the pivot
length for your cue is presented below. For more information on BHE, see my May ’07 article.
             wrong CB                                                           desired CB
             direction                                                           direction

  aiming                                                               aiming
    line       squirt                    aiming                          line
               angle                       line                                     the squirt angle
                                                                                   exactly cancels the
                                                                                      pivot angle

                                                        aim
                                                      shot for
                                                     center-ball
                                                         hit
                            pivot length
                         (bridge distance)
                                                                                        pivot the cue
                                                        bridge                     about the bridge point
                                                         point                      with your back hand
                                                                                       for the desired
                                                                                     amount of English

(a) squirt with no                                                     (c) pivot for English
                                        (b) BHE aim setup
    aim compensation                                                       and aim adjustment

                   Diagram 1 Back-hand English (BHE) squirt compensation

     Low-squirt (AKA “low deflection”) cues can require a bridge length larger than what might be
comfortable for use with BHE. For these cues, a different squirt-compensation aiming method
called front-hand English (FHE) might be more suitable. Diagram 2 illustrates how it works.
Parts “a” and “b” of Diagram 1 still apply; but with FHE, you keep the grip hand stationary while
you move your bridge left or right. If the distance from your grip hand to the CB happens to
match the natural pivot length for the cue, the amount of pivot will exactly cancel the squirt, and
the CB with head in the initial aiming-line direction.

                                                                            squirt angle exactly
                                   pivot length                             cancels pivot angle
                                  (grip distance)
                                                                   aiming
                                                                     line

                                             move the bridge
             pivot the stick                  hand to pivot                    desired
           about the stationary                 the stick                    CB direction
               grip hand

                   Diagram 2 Front-hand English (FHE) squirt compensation

    To use BHE or FHE, you first need to know the natural pivot length for your cue. This is the
distance you need to place the pivot point (bridge for BHE, grip for FHE) to have the pivot angle
cancel the squirt. Diagram 3 illustrates an experiment you can do yourself to determine your
cue’s natural pivot length. First lay a tape measure or string down the center of the table.
Carefully mark the CB and OB locations about 6-8 inches apart between the head spot and the
center of the table. Use self-adhesive hole-reinforcement labels (“donuts”) to mark the ball
locations, and “set” the balls in place by tapping down on them with a spare ball. This will help
ensure accurate and consistent ball placement for each trial of the experiment. Place a target
chalk on the center diamond of the foot rail to help with aiming and to help you clearly see where
the OB hits the rail (right or left of the chalk).

                                                                       decrease
                         bridge                 bridge distance     bridge distance
           head         distance                   at natural
            rail                                  pivot length                    C
                                                                                      B

                                                                                  A
                                         fast
               bridge pivot              medium                                       foot
                   point                 slow
                                                                        increase       rail
                                                                    bridge distance

                               Diagram 3 Pivot point calibration

    For the first shot, use your normal bridge distance. Line up the shot for a center-ball hit,
using the center diamond on the head rail and the chalk on the foot rail to help you align your cue.
Then pivot your aim to apply at least 50% of maximum left English. As we will see next month,
the amount of English has little effect on the results. Regardless, you should use a CB with
markings (e.g., a Jim Rempe CB) or replace the CB with a striped ball so you can apply the same
amount of English on each shot. If using a striped ball, maybe aim the center of the cue between
the edge of the stripe and the edge of the number circle. Use a firm stroke and observe where
the OB hits the foot rail. The short distance between the CB and OB, and the fast shot speed,
help limit the effect of swerve. Also keep your cue as level as possible (i.e., don’t elevate the
back end) to also limit swerve. The fast speed and a larger amount of English help reduce the
effects of throw (see my December ’06 article).

     In Diagram 3, three cases are shown: “A, “B,” and “C.” Case “A” corresponds to a bridge
distance shorter than the natural pivot length. The pivot angle of the cue is too large, as
compared to the squirt angle, and the CB goes left of the centerline as shown in the diagram,
causing the OB to go right of the centerline. In this case you need to move your bridge farther
away from the CB and try again. Each time you move your bridge, mark the new location on top
of the shaft with a small piece of tape or Post-It note. Case “B” corresponds to the bridge
distance being exactly equal to the natural pivot length of the cue. In this case, the pivot angle
exactly cancels the squirt angle, and the CB and OB both head along the centerline, ignoring
throw for now (see the next paragraph). So if the OB heads straight, then the bridge distance (or
grip distance) is what you want to use when applying the BHE (or FHE) method. Case “C”
corresponds to a bridge distance longer than the natural pivot length. The pivot angle of the cue
is too small, as compared to the squirt angle, and the CB goes right of the centerline, causing the
OB to go left of the centerline. In this case you need to move your bridge closer the CB and try
again. If you keep adjusting your bridge location, eventually you’ll see case “B” and you will have
found the natural pivot length for your cue.
     To get the best measurement, you need to make sure throw does not corrupt your results.
With spin-induced throw (SIT), the OB would go off course a little when the CB heads straight up
the centerline. To limit this effect, you can wet the contact area on the OB (e.g., with spit on your
finger) to reduce friction. An even better solution is to spray and wipe the balls with silicone
spray. This will dramatically reduce friction between the balls and between the CB and the cloth
to mostly eliminate the effects of both throw and swerve. If you plan to use silicone spray,
consider using spare balls (i.e., not balls from your normal playing set). You wouldn’t want one or
two slicked-up balls in your set that will play differently from the rest. Faster speed also reduces
the effects of both throw and swerve. Referring to case “B” in Diagram 3, using fast speed and
silicone-sprayed balls with the bridge at the natural pivot distance, the CB should stop in place
spinning and the OB should head perfectly straight up table and rebound straight back to the CB
(assuming the table is level).

    I used the experiment described above to measure the pivot lengths for several of my cues.
Here are the results: Players XIX (12.75 mm shaft): 12.7 inches; Predator Z (11.85 mm shaft):
20.2 inches; Stinger break/jump cue (13.5 mm shaft): 9.2 inches. As you can see, the pivot
length can vary quite a lot among different cues. The pivot length I measured for my Predator Z
shaft falls outside the comfort zones for using BHE and FHE (for me anyway). Nonetheless,
some people report success-using FHE with low-squirt cues. Maybe it is because throw is
coming into play. FHE, with a grip distance longer than the natural pivot length, might not be
adjusting for squirt enough, but throw might be helping to bring the OB back on line. However,
the amount of throw depends a lot on conditions and the type of shot (see my August ’06 through
July ’07 articles), so this method might not be reliable. I personally don’t use BHE or FHE, but the
techniques do seem to be helpful to some people. I adjust my aim mostly intuitively (backed up
by knowledge and understanding of various effects) based on the amount of squirt, swerve, and
throw I expect for a given shot. The other thing I do is try to avoid English for shots where CB
accuracy is critical (e.g., long and/or thin-cut shots). Squirt, swerve, and throw are too difficult to
predict and manage when extreme accuracy is required.

    One shot where the natural pivot length can be very important is the break shot. Not all of us
have a perfect stroke and we don’t always deliver the cue perfectly straight, especially at break
speeds. But if your break bridge-distance happens to match the natural pivot length for your
break cue, errors in stroking direction will not affect your break accuracy, provided your initial aim
is good. Diagram 4 shows how this works. (Note that swerve really isn’t a factor at break
speeds.) In Diagram 4a, the stroke and hit are perfect. In Diagram 4b, the shooter
unintentionally pivots the cue during the stroke, applying unintentional left English to the CB. But
because the bridge is at the natural pivot length of the cue, the pivot angle cancels out the squirt
angle, and the CB still heads in the initial aiming line direction. So we still get a direct hit, despite
the stroke error. Isn’t that amazing? This is a great example where a little knowledge about your
equipment and squirt compensation techniques can help improve your game ... immediately! So
the next time you buy a break cue, try to get one that has a natural pivot length that matches your
most comfortable break bridge-distance.
                                        fast
                                        medium
                                        slow

                                                                                                     15
                                                                                                10

                                                                                                     14
                                                                                            6
                                                                                        3

                                                                                                9

                                                                                                     13
                                                                                    1

                                                                                            5
                                                                                        2

                                                                                                8

                                                                                                     12
                                                                                            4

                                                                                                7
                                (a) perfect stroke with a direct hit

                                                                                                     11
         bridge at the
         cue's natural                  fast
                                        medium
          pivot length
                                        slow

                                                                                                     15
                                                                                                10

                                                                                                     14
                                                                                            6
                                                                                        3

                                                                                                9

                                                                                                     13
                                                                                    1

                                                                                            5
                                                                                        2

                                                                                                8

                                                                                                     12
                                                                                            4

                                                                                                7

                                                                                                     11
           (b) cue unintentionally pivoted during the stroke, still resulting in a direct hit

                         Diagram 4 Break with bridge at natural pivot point

    I hope you are enjoying and learning from my series on squirt. Next month, we’ll look at the
effects of tip size and shape on squirt and aim compensation. I hope you look forward to the
remainder of the series.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS: I know other authors and I tend to use a lot of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, cling, stun,
tangent line, 30º rule, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you
ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the glossary in my
book. For convenience, an expanded version is posted online in the “Instructor and Student
Resources” section of my website.

PS: I just released a new DVD called “High-speed Video Magic.” It features billiards, but it also
includes stupid human and animal tricks, balloons popping and bouncing, things breaking,
engineering stuff, toy physics, and fluids and foods in motion. For more information and video
excerpts, see the website (billiards.colostate.edu).

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/squirt_part_v_low_squirt_cues.pdf
title: Squirt - Part V: low-squirt cues
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Squirt – Part V: low-squirt cues”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article help you locate the resources on the website. If you
have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources
from a CD-ROM or DVD. See the website for details.

     This is the fifth article in my series dealing with “squirt.” So far, we have looked at basic
terminology, the physics behind squirt, some experimental results, the effects of follow and draw
on squirt and swerve, and techniques for compensating one’s aim for squirt. To refresh your
memory, squirt, also called deflection, refers to the angular change in the initial cue ball (CB)
direction due to an off-center hit. In other words, when you use English, the CB doesn’t go where
you are aiming because of squirt. For more background information, see my August ’07 article
and refer to NV 4.13 and NV A.17. When using English, it is also important to be aware of the
effects of swerve (see NV 4.14 and NV 7.12) and throw (see NV 4.15, NV 4.16, NV A.21, and
my August ’06 through July ’07 articles). Sometimes, the phrase “effective squirt” or the term
“squerve” is used to refer to the net effect of both squirt and swerve on the shift in the CB
position at object ball (OB) impact (see my August ’07 article for more information). If you want to
refer back to any of my past articles, they are all available on my website
(billiards.colostate.edu).
                  NV 4.13 – Squirt due to high speed English
                  NV 4.14 – English curve due to an elevated cue
                  NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
                  NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video      NV 7.12 – Small-curve massé shot
                  NV A.17 – Effective squirt vs. speed
                  NV A.21 – Bank shot using throw and spin transfer

     This month, we’ll look at low-squirt cues. Several cue manufacturers offer these. Some of
the most popular brands and models are the Predator Z and 314 shafts, and the OB-1 shaft. In
my August ’07 article, I explained and illustrated the physics behind squirt (see TP A.31 for the
nitty-gritty details). Basically, the less mass the cue has at the end of the shaft (close to the tip),
the less squirt it will have. The stiffness of the end of the shaft can also have an effect (see TP
A.31). Techniques used by manufacturers to reduce the “endmass” include using a smaller
diameter shaft and tip, using a smaller and/or lighter ferrule, and/or drilling out the core of the end
of the shaft. All of these measures help create a low-squirt cue.

                  TP A.31 – The physics of squirt
technical proof

    Users of the BD CCB online discussion forum often discuss and debate whether or not a low-
squirt cue is worth the money. To try to focus the debate and find out where various users (pool
enthusiasts, instructors, players, etc.) stand, I posted a poll on the forum. Here is how I stated
the question:

          A low-squirt (AKA "low cue-ball deflection") cue creates less squirt (i.e., the cue ball
      heads closer to the stick's aiming line direction when struck). Therefore, not as much aim
      adjustment or compensation is required when using English with a low-squirt cue. However,
    the value of this is debatable ... hence this poll. I hope people from both sides of the
    argument will participate in the poll and add comments for discussion.

        Can a low-squirt cue make a player better, and can it help one level of player more than
    other levels? When answering the question, assume the player has always used the same
    cue. So you are comparing how good the player would be if they had always used a low-
    squirt cue vs. how good they would be if they had always used a cue with more squirt (e.g.,
    twice the amount of squirt as the low-squirt cue). Assume all other factors are equal. Also
    assume that the player uses English (i.e., squirt will be a factor).

        I know that there might be more options, and these options might not be perfect; but
    please try to select what you think is the best of the answers provided, and add comments if
    necessary to better explain your position.

    Diagram 1 shows the seven answer options I provided along with the poll results.
Unfortunately, I did not design the question and answers carefully enough to take everything into
consideration, and this was not a controlled study, and only 39 posters responded, but I thought
the results were interesting and worth presenting anyway. The most popular choice was option A
(53%). These people thought a low-squirt cue could help any player. 17% chose option C,
indicating that the type of cue makes no difference for players at any level. A significant number
(15%) chose option D, indication that only a beginner or intermediate player would benefit from a
low-squirt cue. I guess the only result that surprised me was option C, because I think if a
beginner or intermediate player uses English and is not very good at compensating for squirt, a
cue with less squirt might result in them missing fewer shots; but apparently not everybody
agrees with this viewpoint. To read some of the comments and debate that went along with the
votes, see “cue” – “low-squirt cues” – “poll concerning usefulness” in the “Online Discussion
Threads” section of my website.

  60%

            53%
                      A: any player at any level would be better with a low-squirt cue
  50%                 B: any player at any level would be worse with a low-squirt cue
                      C: any player at any level would be just as good with either type of cue
                      D: only a beginner or intermediate player would be better with a low-squirt cue
                      E: only a beginner or intermediate player would be worse with a low-squirt cue
  40%                 F: only a top player would be better with a low-squirt cue
                      G: only a top player would be worse with a low-squirt cue

  30%

  20%                                 17%
                                                    15%

  10%
                                                                                 5%
                         2%                                        2%                          2%
   0%
              A           B             C             D             E             F            G

                              Diagram 1 Low-squirt cue poll results
     To try to more scientifically answer the question of whether a low-squirt can help some
players, I decided to do a simple analysis. Diagram 2 shows the results graphically. As reported
in my September ’07 article, “low-squirt cues” typically have about 30% less squirt than a
“regular” cue (i.e., a “regular” cue has about 40% more squirt than a “low-squirt” cue). This
difference is illustrated with the green bars in the diagram. One thing I assumed in the analysis is
that the typical error in judging the amount of squirt for a given amount of English will be a fixed
percentage of the overall squirt range for the cue. So for a cue with a larger squirt range, the
typical error in judging the amount of squirt will be proportionally larger (see the red bars). This
assumption seems reasonable to me. If the amount of squirt varies over a larger range, you will
probably be less accurate with identifying a specific squirt value within the range. Some people
think they can be equally accurate regardless of the size of the range, but I don’t think that is the
case for most people. One exception might be a player who uses back-hand-English (BHE) aim
compensation and has a cue with a natural pivot length well-matched to his or her preferred
bridge length (see last month’s article for more info).

                                                                               desired CB target
                                                                            (center of error margin)
                                                                                          required
                                 low-squirt cue            regular cue                   aiming line
                                (30% less squirt)       (40% more squirt)                  target
         squirt range for
        various amounts
           of English
                                                                                               stroking
   typical error in judging the                                                                  error
amount of squirt for a given shot
  (e.g., 20% of the full range)
                                                                                          squirt angle
 margin of error for a given shot                                                        (exaggerated)
        (same for both)

       stroking error range
          (same for both)
                                               portion of range
                                              with shot success

          worst case
          error range

                                    slightly smaller      slightly larger
                                      shot-spread          shot-spread
                                         range                range

             Diagram 2 Error comparison between low-squirt and regular cues

    As shown with the figure on the right side of Diagram 2, for a given shot using English, there
is a desired target for the CB (in the center of the blue margin-of-error bar). Nobody’s stroke is
perfect, so you will have some random error in your stroking accuracy (see the magenta [light
purple] bar). Finally, you might not judge the amount of the squirt for the shot accurately (see the
red bar). Because the stroking error range is shown larger than the acceptable margin of error for
the shot, the implication is that you wouldn’t make this shot 100% of the time, even if you did
compensate for squirt perfectly. At the bottom of the diagram, I show how all of these
considerations affect your likelihood of making the shot. Due to the larger uncertainty in squirt for
the regular cue, the shot spread will be slightly larger, and you will miss the shot more frequently.
Now, the relative sizes of all of these bars will vary from shot to shot and from person to person,
but I think the simple analysis suggests a low-squirt cue might offer a slight improvement in shot
success when English is being used.

    Another small benefit of using a low-squirt cue is the ability to get slightly more English than
with a regular cue. Diagram 3 illustrates the rationale behind this. The amount of English
depends on the effective offset of the line of action, not the actual tip offset (see TP A.31 for more
details). The larger the squirt angle, the smaller the effective offset will be. However, this effect
is very small since typical squirt angles are so small (1-3 degrees). The increased-English effect
certainly isn’t strong enough to justify purchasing a low-squirt cue.

                                                           effective
                                                            offset
                                 actual
                               tip offset
                                                                       exaggerated
                                                                       squirt angle

                             Diagram 3 Actual vs. effective tip offset

    I hope you are enjoying and learning from my series on squirt. Next month, we’ll look at the
effects of tip size and shape on squirt and aim compensation. I hope you look forward to the
remainder of the series. By the way, my answer to the question of whether a low-squirt cue can
help is: yes, especially if you believe it can help you. The mind is a powerful thing. I use a low-
squirt cue and I think I play better with it; therefore, I probably do.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS: I know other authors and I tend to use a lot of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, cling, stun,
tangent line, 30º rule, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you
ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the glossary in my
book. For convenience, an expanded version is posted online in the “Instructor and Student
Resources” section of my website.

PS: I just released a new DVD called “High-speed Video Magic.” It features billiards, but it also
includes stupid human and animal tricks, balloons popping and bouncing, things breaking,
engineering stuff, toy physics, and fluids and foods in motion. For more information and video
excerpts, see the website (billiards.colostate.edu).

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/squirt_part_vi_tip_shape.pdf
title: Squirt - Part VI: tip shape
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                             ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Squirt – Part VI: tip shape”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. See the website for details.

     This is the sixth article in my series dealing with “squirt.” So far, we have looked at basic
terminology, the physics behind squirt, some experimental results, the effects of follow and draw
on squirt and swerve, techniques for compensating one’s aim for squirt, and low-squirt cues. To
refresh your memory, squirt, also called deflection, refers to the angular change in the initial cue
ball (CB) direction due to an off-center hit. In other words, when you use English, the CB doesn’t
go where you are aiming because of squirt. For more background information, see my August
’07 article and refer to NV 4.13 and NV A.17. When using English, it is also important to be
aware of the effects of swerve (see NV 4.14 and NV 7.12) and throw (see NV 4.15, NV 4.16, NV
A.21, and my August ’06 through July ’07 articles). Sometimes, the phrase “effective squirt” or
the term “squerve” is used to refer to the net effect of both squirt and swerve on the shift in the
CB position at object ball (OB) impact (see my August ’07 article for more information). If you
want to refer back to any of my past articles, they are all available on my website
(billiards.colostate.edu).
               NV 4.13 – Squirt due to high speed English
               NV 4.14 – English curve due to an elevated cue
               NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
               NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video   NV 7.12 – Small-curve massé shot
               NV A.17 – Effective squirt vs. speed
               NV A.21 – Bank shot using throw and spin transfer

     This month, we’ll look at how tip shape affects English and squirt. Many people in pool halls
will tell you: If you want to get more English, use a rounder tip. People usually recommend the tip
shape should be somewhere between the curvature of a nickel and a dime; and if you use a lot of
English, a dime shape is probably best. I think most people think this is sound advice. Now,
what many people don’t know is how tip shape affects the amount of English applied and the
amount of resulting squirt.

     Two months ago, we looked at back-hand English (BHE) and front-hand English (FHE)
squirt-compensation techniques and cue pivot-length calibration. BHE and FHE are also known
as aim-and-pivot techniques. For these methods to be effective, the amount of squirt must
increase as the cue pivot-angle increases. As shown in Diagram 1, when you pivot the cue, the
tip contact-point offset increases. This is what creates sidespin (English). The location of the
point (and the amount of English) also depends on the shape of the tip (see “tip radius” in the
diagram). Fortunately, squirt angle increases nearly linearly with tip offset, and tip offset
increases nearly linearly with cue pivot angle. So if you pivot the cue twice as much, you create
roughly twice as much tip offset (and English) and you create roughly twice as much squirt.
Because of this, the pivot angle can roughly cancel squirt angle for any amount of English, and
the CB still heads in the original aiming line direction (see my November ’07 article for more
information). The math and physics behind all of this, with some useful graphs and conclusions,
can be found in TP B.1.
                         original                      cue                          tip
                         aiming                       pivot                    contact point
                           line                       angle                       "offset"

          cue
         pivot
        length                                                  tip
                                                              contact                     tip
                                                               point                    radius

                           bridge
                            pivot
                            point

                      Diagram 1 Cue pivot length, pivot angle, and tip offset

                  TP B.1 – Squirt angle, pivot length, and tip size
technical proof

     TP B.1 also investigates the effects of tip shape and CB weight on the natural pivot length of
a cue. It turns out that the required cue pivot length (see Diagram 1) does vary a little with both
tip offset and tip radius. TP B.1 shows that the natural pivot length of a cue is about 5% longer
for a cue with a tip of nickel radius vs. the same cue with a tip of dime radius. So if you ever
change or reshape your tip, and you use an aim-and-pivot aim compensation method, you might
need to recalibrate your pivot point a little for the new tip shape. Also, when comparing different
cues, it is important to use the same tip shape and the same amount of tip offset (English) for
each cue; otherwise, the results can be misleading.

    The “natural pivot length” for a cue also depends on the CB weight. (I want to thank
“Spiderman” on the BD CCB online discussion forum for bringing this to my attention. We all
hope his recovery from his recent motorcycle accident is speedy and complete.) TP B.1 shows
that a 10% heavier CB increases the pivot length by about 9%, and a 10% lighter CB shortens
the pivot length by about 9%. So if you are playing on a bar box with a heavier CB, and if you
use an aim-and-pivot technique, you might need to adjust your pivot length. See my November
’07 article for a simple experiment you can use to determine the pivot point for whatever cue, tip
shape, and CB weight you might be using.

    Diagram 2 illustrates another effect related to tip size. Both cases show a tip of the same
size located at the same “tip” position (i.e., the centerlines of the tips are aligned). As you can
see, the rounder tip (left) creates more offset, and therefore more English, than the flatter tip.
This is probably one reason people report better “action” with a rounder tip. Another benefit of
the rounder tip is that the tip contact point is closer to the centerline of the cue. This allows the
large impact forces between the tip and ball to transfer more solidly, which might result in less
vibration and a better “feel.”

    Another tip-shape issue also illustrated by Diagram 2 is that a flatter tip keeps the contact
point closer to the center of the ball for a given tip offset. This is important in understanding
accuracy with a center-ball hit. If you are aiming for a center-ball hit and you have a slight
stroking error, unintentional English will be imparted to the CB. This will cause squirt, swerve,
and spin-induced-throw (see my August ‘06 article), which can make you miss the shot. As
shown in TP B.1, a flatter tip helps reduce the effect of center-ball-hit stroking error, because the
amount of English will be less than with a rounder tip.

                                   same "tip" position for both

                                                                                       larger
                                                                                       offset
                                                                                        with
                                                                                      rounder
                                                                                         tip

             rounder tip                           flatter tip
           (smaller radius)                     (larger radius)

                   Diagram 2 Effect of tip shape on tip contact point offset

    A shorter bridge also helps minimize the effects of stroking error with a center-ball hit. With a
shorter bridge, cue pivot-angle errors don’t result in as much tip motion (see TP B.1 and TP
A.10). However, a shorter bridge can cause other stroke problems (e.g., not enough length for
smooth acceleration), and a shorter bridge might fail to take advantage of the squirt-canceling
natural-pivot-length effect of the cue (see my November '07 article).

     Many people use “tips of English” to specify and visually see how much English is applied to
the CB. Diagram 3 shows how “tips of English” varies for shots with different amounts of offset
for an average size cue tip. The amount of English (sidespin) imparted to the CB depends on the
distance the cue-tip contact point is offset from the center of the CB. It is important to distinguish
contact-point offset from cue centerline offset. “Tips of English” is measured relative to the center
of the cue. For example, in Diagram 2, the “tips of English” is the same for both cases, but the tip
contact-point offset (and amount of English) is different. In my July ’06 article, I suggested using
“percentage English” instead of “tips of English” to specify and visualize the amount of English.
0% English corresponds to a center-ball hit, which imparts no English to the CB. 100% English
corresponds to the maximum amount of English that can be applied. Any additional offset would
result in a miscue. Diagram 3 shows the miscue limit (half the ball’s radius) with the large dashed
circle. At 100% English, the center of the cue is offset a little less than 1 1/2 tip widths, which
explains the “1.4 tips of English.” 50% English corresponds to the tip position that results in a
contact point halfway to the miscue limit, which corresponds to “3/4 tips of English”. The diagram
also shows 25% English.

    The tip size used in Diagram 3 (relative to the scaled 2.25” ball) is 12.5 mm. However, as I
showed in my July ‘06 article, both the size and shape of the tip can create a significant
discrepancy between “tips of English” for different cues. “1.4 tips of English” for one cue can be
radically different than “1.4 tips of English” for another. That’s why I prefer the percentage
English terminology. 50% (or 1/2 maximum) English is always half the maximum, regardless of
what cue you are using. You just need to be able to understand and visualize the tip contact
point and judge how close it is to the miscue limit. That intuition is easy to gain with practice.
       0% English            25% (1/4 max) English    50% (1/2 max) English       100% (max) English
                                                          offset              miscue
                                                                               limit

                     tip
                   contact
                    point

                                          1                                                     1
          0                          0                         0    1                    0   1 12
                                          2

        0 "tips"                   0.37 "tips"                 0.75 "tips"               1.40 "tips"

                     Diagram 3 Percent English (offset) and “Tips” of English

   I hope you are enjoying and learning from my series on squirt. Over the next two months, I’ll
complete the series by looking at some experimental results from a cue-testing machine and the
combined effects of squirt and swerve.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS: I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, cling, stun,
tangent line, 30º rule, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you
ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online glossary
in the “Instructor and Student Resources” section of my website.

PS: I just released a new DVD called “High-speed Video Magic.” It features billiards, but it also
includes stupid human and animal tricks, balloons popping and bouncing, things breaking,
engineering stuff, toy physics, and fluids and foods in motion. For more information and video
excerpts, see the website (billiards.colostate.edu).

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/squirt_part_vii_cue_test_machine_results.pdf
title: Squirt - Part VII: cue test machine results
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                                ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Squirt – Part VII: cue test machine results”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. See the website for details.

     This is the seventh article in my series dealing with “squirt.” So far, we have looked at basic
terminology, the physics behind squirt, some experimental results, the effects of follow and draw
on squirt and swerve, techniques for compensating one’s aim for squirt, low-squirt cues, and tip
shape effects. To refresh your memory, squirt, also called deflection, refers to the angular
change in the initial cue ball (CB) direction due to an off-center hit. In other words, when you use
English, the CB doesn’t go where you are aiming because of squirt. For more background
information, see my August ’07 article and refer to NV 4.13 and NV A.17. When using English, it
is also important to be aware of the effects of swerve (see NV 4.14 and NV 7.12) and throw (see
NV 4.15, NV 4.16, NV A.21, and my August ’06 through July ’07 articles). Sometimes, the phrase
“effective squirt” or the term “squerve” is used to refer to the net effect of both squirt and swerve
on the shift in the CB position at object ball (OB) impact (see my August ’07 article for more
information). If you want to refer back to any of my past articles, they are all available on my
website (billiards.colostate.edu).
                NV 4.13 – Squirt due to high speed English
                NV 4.14 – English curve due to an elevated cue
                NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
                NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video    NV 7.12 – Small-curve massé shot
                NV A.17 – Effective squirt vs. speed
                NV A.21 – Bank shot using throw and spin transfer

     This month, we’ll look at some recent experimental data collected with a cue squirt-testing
machine I have been working on with a group of mechanical engineering students at Colorado
State University. Diagram 1 shows the first version of the machine. It consists of a spring-
loaded carriage on a linear rail that consistently and accurate delivers the cue at a desired speed
and CB tip-contact point. This machine is different from previous machines (e.g., Predator’s “Iron
Willie” and Meucci’s “Myth Destroyer”) in several ways. First, the cue is held perfectly horizontal
throughout the entire stroke (i.e., the cue is not elevated and the stroke is a perfect “piston”
motion). This completely eliminates CB swerve as a factor. This is an important feature because
swerve can vary with cue elevation, ball speed, shot distance, and ball and cloth conditions,
making it difficult to interpret squirt results. Also, no OB is involved so throw is not a factor either.
Our machine measures just the squirt characteristics of the cue ... nothing more. You can view a
demonstration of how the machine is used by clicking on “CSU cue squirt-testing machine” under
“Miscellaneous” in the “Online Video Collection” section of my website. In the remainder of the
article, I will show some useful and interesting test results from the machine.

                       *** The sponsor of the project asked that the photo
                           no longer be visible in the article. Sorry. ***

                              Diagram 1 Cue squirt testing machine
    Diagram 2 shows experimental data for squirt measurements taken over a wide range of
shot speeds. Many people think squirt is larger at higher speeds than at lower speeds. This
“myth” is shown with the red curve in the diagram. As the actual data points show, squirt is very
nearly constant over a wide range of speeds, for a given tip offset. This conclusion is in
agreement with the “human robot” data presented in my September ’07 article. As with all of the
graphs in this article, each data point represents the average of five trials taken at each setting
(e.g., each speed in Diagram 2). I think one reason people sometimes think squirt increases with
speed is because they might be including the effects of swerve in their thinking. “Effective squirt”
(AKA “squerve”) due to both squirt and swerve does depend quite a bit on shot speed (see my
October ’07 article). One final observation about Diagram 2: you might notice a small dip in
squirt measurements at medium speeds. I’m not sure how to explain this physically, and it could
even be a slight error introduced by how the machine functions. Regardless, it is a very small
effect. I think it is safe to say that squirt is very nearly constant with speed and doesn’t increase
with speed as the “myth” curve suggests.

                                Squirt vs. Speed for a Player's cue with 75% tip offset

                          3.0
                                    actual data
                          2.5

                          2.0
       squirt (degrees)

                          1.5
                                    myth curve

                          1.0

                                          speed
                          0.5
                                                                                             squirt

                          0.0
                                3                 4         5             6            7              8
                                                             speed (mph)

                                         Diagram 2 Squirt vs. speed for a fixed tip offset

      Diagram 3 shows squirt measurements for a laminated cue (Meucci) at various cue twist
positions. At different twist angles, the wood layers are oriented at different angles relative to the
table. The shaft is expected to have different properties (e.g., stiffness) at different twist angles
(i.e., cue orientations). Some people think the cue will create different amounts of squirt in
different orientations. If this were true, you would expect the squirt to vary somewhat as shown
by the red “myth” curve in Diagram 3. One would expect the largest difference between the 0°
and 90° orientations, and one would expect the values to be the same at the 0°, 180°, and 360°
orientations, because the wood layers are aligned in the same directions at those twist angles.
The actual squirt measurements show that squirt does not vary significantly with the cue
orientation. The look, “feel,” and sound of the cue might be different in different orientations, but
the data clearly shows that the squirt is nearly constant for all orientations. These results are
backed up by the theory (see TP A.31), which predicts the squirt varies only with the effective
“end-mass” of the cue. The “end-mass” might vary slightly with orientation due to slight stiffness
variation (see TP A.31), but the effect is obviously not significant in the data.

                                          TP A.31 – The physics of squirt
technical proof

                                                 Squirt vs. twist angle for a Meucci shaft

                               3.50

                               3.00

                                                    actual data
                               2.50
      squirt angle (degrees)

                               2.00
                                                                                           myth curve

                               1.50

                               1.00
                                           end view
                                                         twist              shaft laminations
                                                         angle
                               0.50

                               0.00
                                      0        45        90       135       180      225        270     315   360
                                                              shaft twist angle (degrees)

                                                 Diagram 3 Squirt vs. laminated-shaft twist angle

    Diagram 4 shows the results of a classic experiment to show how end-mass affects a cue’s
squirt. In the experiment, a mass is added to the cue at different positions. When the mass is
close to the tip, the effect on the squirt is the largest; and when the added mass is more than a
certain distance from the tip, the added mass has no effect on the amount of squirt. People who
believe cue stiffness is what causes squirt, and end-mass has no effect, would predict the red
“myth” curve shown in the diagram. The two sets of actual data (the green and blue curves)
show the end-mass effect very clearly. The “masses” used in the experiment are two sizes of
standard binder clips (available at any office supply store). The clips attach to the cue rigidly and
can be easily shifted along the cue. The small binder clip was weighed in at 3 grams (0.105
ounces), and the larger clip weighed in at 11 grams (0.385 ounces). The results show that the
more mass you add to the end of the cue, and the closer the mass is to the tip, the more the cue
will squirt. Also, if mass is added beyond a certain distance from the tip, it has no effect on the
squirt. For the Players cue I tested, the distance was about 7 inches. Notice how the curves
level out to the same squirt value beyond the 7 inches, regardless of the amount of the added
mass. The results of this experiment explain why manufacturers have been able to create “low-
squirt” cues by using a smaller diameter shaft, drilling out the end of the shaft, and/or using a
lighter ferrule. All of these modifications reduce the end-mass of the cue (see my December ’07
article for more information).

                        Diagram 4 Squirt vs. position of added mass

    One more thing to note in Diagram 4 is how the squirt seemed to dip a little lower for the
larger added mass, before flattening out. When we first saw this, we wondered if adding even
more mass at this magic point would reduce the squirt even further. If that were the case, we
might have discovered a new way to make a low-squirt cue. Unfortunately, adding more mass at
that point did not cause additional decreases in squirt. Bummer!

    If you want to see an exaggerated example of the effect of end-mass on squirt, see NV B.1.
Near the end of the video, Mike Page uses a pair of vise grips to add significant mass and squirt
to a cue. The effect is dramatic ... check it out. I don’t recommend using vise grips at home,
because you might damage your cue, but binder clips are easy to come by and won’t cause
damage if you are careful. Give it a try.
                NV B.1 – Mike Page's squirt and swerve video
normal video

    I hope you are enjoying and learning from my series on squirt. Next month, I’ll conclude the
series by summarizing many important conclusions about the combined effects of squirt and
swerve.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS: I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, cling, stun,
tangent line, 30º rule, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you
ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online glossary
in the “Instructor and Student Resources” section of my website.

PS: I just released a new DVD called “High-speed Video Magic.” It features billiards, but it also
includes stupid human and animal tricks, balloons popping and bouncing, things breaking,
engineering stuff, toy physics, and fluids and foods in motion. For more information and video
excerpts, see the website (billiards.colostate.edu).

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/squirt_part_viii_squerve_effects.pdf
title: Squirt - Part VIII: squerve effects
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                                  ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Squirt – Part VIII: squerve effects”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. See the website for details.

     This is the eighth and final article in my series dealing with “squirt.” So far, we have looked at
basic terminology, the physics behind squirt, some experimental results, the effects of follow and
draw on squirt and swerve, techniques for compensating one’s aim for squirt, low-squirt cues, tip
shape effects, and cue-test machine results. To refresh your memory, squirt, also called
deflection, refers to the angular change in the initial cue ball (CB) direction due to an off-center
hit. In other words, when you use English, the CB doesn’t go where you are aiming because of
squirt. For more background information, see my August ’07 article and refer to NV 4.13 and NV
A.17. When using English, it is also important to be aware of the effects of swerve (see NV 4.14
and NV 7.12) and throw (see NV 4.15, NV 4.16, NV A.21, and my August ’06 through July ’07
articles). Sometimes, the phrase “effective squirt” or the term “squerve” is used to refer to the
net effect of both squirt and swerve on the shift in the CB position at object ball (OB) impact (see
my August ’07 article for more information). If you want to refer back to any of my past articles,
they are all available on my website (billiards.colostate.edu).
                      NV 4.13 – Squirt due to high speed English
                      NV 4.14 – English curve due to an elevated cue
                      NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
                      NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video          NV 7.12 – Small-curve massé shot
                      NV A.17 – Effective squirt vs. speed
                      NV A.21 – Bank shot using throw and spin transfer

   This month, we’ll look in detail at the interactions of squirt and swerve. Let’s start with a
summary of all of the important effects concerning squirt and swerve:
     •         squirt increases with the amount of English.
     •         squirt does not depend on shot speed.
     •         squirt increases with the amount of shaft end-mass (e.g., a low-squirt cue has less end-
               mass and results in less squirt).
     •         squirt is less with a heavier CB.
     •         squerve can be zero with certain speeds and cue elevations for a given shot distance,
               amount of English, and cue.
     •         squirt or squerve can be canceled using back-hand English (BHE) or front-hand English
               (FHE) aim-and-pivot methods.
     •         swerve increases with cue elevation.
     •         swerve occurs with practically all English shots because the cue must be elevated to
               clear the rails.
     •         swerve is delayed with faster shot speed.
    •   swerve occurs only while the CB is sliding; once rolling begins, the CB heads in a straight
        line.
    •   swerve occurs earlier with sticky cloth and later on slick cloth.
    •   swerve occurs earlier with a follow shot than with a draw shot.
    •   swerve angle is larger with a draw shot than with a follow shot.
    •   swerve angle can be predicted and visualized using the Coriolis masse-shot aiming
        method presented in my November ’05 article.

Refer to my past articles in this series for detailed explanations and illustrations of most of these
effects.

      Now let’s look at a collection of examples to show how knowledge of all of these effects can
help you understand what will happen with various speeds and cue elevations for follow and draw
shots with English. Diagram 1 shows fast follow and draw shots, with English, over a short
distance, with a typical cue elevation (enough to clear the rails). Be aware that the diagram isn’t
drawn to scale. The squirt angle is exaggerated to help illustrate the effects. Both shots in
Diagram 1 end up to the left of the aiming line. With the fast speed and short distance, squirt is
still the dominant effect (especially with a cue with larger squirt). The fast speed delays the
swerve action, and it takes more distance for the CB to develop complete roll.

                                                   same squirt angle
                                                 and initial CB direction
                                                     for both shots
                 follow shot   draw shot

                                                                            aiming line

                               fast
                               medium       the follow shot      the draw shot
                 typical cue                                     slides longer,
                  elevation    slow        swerves sooner
                                                              delaying the swerve

              Diagram 1 Short, fast shots with typical (very little) cue elevation

     Diagram 2 shows what happens with slower speed over a longer distance. The ball stops
sliding and the swerve occurs sooner. Then the CB heads in a straight line. The draw shot takes
a little longer for the swerve to complete, but the final swerve angle is a little larger (see my
October ’07 article for more information). With the follow shot, the swerve effect is smaller than
the squirt effect, so the CB ends up to the left of the aiming line. With the draw shot, the final
swerve angle is slightly larger than the squirt angle, so the CB ends up to the right of the aiming
line.
 follow shot    draw shot

                                                       aiming line

                  fast
                  medium                  the follow shot                              the draw shot
  typical cue                                                                        has a slightly larger
   elevation      slow                  swerves and begins
                                           to roll sooner                               swerve angle

                         Diagram 2 Long, slow shots with typical cue elevation

    Diagram 3 shows what happens to fast, short shots with slightly more cue elevation than
normal. Comparing Diagram 3 to Diagram 1, you can see that the extra elevation creates more
swerve. Also, the CB slides and swerves over a longer distance. With the large swerve angle,
the CB would eventually cross to the right of the aiming line; but for a fast shot, the squirt effect
can still dominate, keeping the CB left of the aiming line over the short distance.

                  follow shot           draw shot

                                                                           both balls
                                              fast                       swerve more
                           slight cue
                                              medium                       and over a
                           elevation
                                              slow
                                                                        greater distance

                         Diagram 3 Short, fast shots with a slightly elevated cue

    Diagram 4 shows what happens for a slower speed and longer distance. With this cue
elevation, the CB can end up quite a bit to the right of the aiming line.

 follow shot    draw shot

                                                                aiming line

                  fast              the follow shot                    the draw shot
   slight cue
                  medium          swerves and begins                 has a slightly larger
   elevation      slow               to roll sooner                     swerve angle

                         Diagram 4 Long, slow shots with a slightly elevated cue
    If you want more discussion, examples, and demonstrations of squirt and swerve and the
effects of speed and cue elevation, refer to NV B.1. Mike Page does a good job at describing
and illustrating some of the effects. Also, if you want to learn more about masse shot effects and
aiming, see my November ’05 article. A masse shot is just an elevated-cue shot with a lot more
swerve than normal (due to the larger cue elevation).

                NV B.1 – Mike Page's squirt and swerve video
normal video

    I hope you have enjoyed and learned from my series on squirt. I also hope you look forward
to a new topic next month ... I certainly do.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS: I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, cling, stun,
tangent line, 30º rule, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you
ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online glossary
in the “Instructor and Student Resources” section of my website.

PS: I just released a new DVD called “High-speed Video Magic.” It features billiards, but it also
includes stupid human and animal tricks, balloons popping and bouncing, things breaking,
engineering stuff, toy physics, and fluids and foods in motion. For more information and video
excerpts, see my website (billiards.colostate.edu).

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/squirt_swerve_and_throw_wrap_up.pdf
title: Squirt, Swerve, and Throw Wrap-up
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Squirt, Swerve, and Throw Wrap-up”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. See the website for details.

     In case you haven’t noticed, I just dedicated the last 20 articles (almost two years worth) to
squirt, swerve, and throw. I’m sure many of you are thinking: “enough, already!” Well, before
moving on to other topics, I wanted to give some examples that bring together some of the
information in a “big picture” sort of way.

     Diagram 1 illustrates all of the effects that come into play when using English. To refresh
your memory, squirt, also called deflection, refers to the angular change in the initial cue ball
(CB) direction due to an off-center hit. In other words, when you use English, the CB doesn’t go
where you are aiming because of squirt. The amount of squirt increases with the amount of
English. For more information, see my August ‘07 through March ‘08 articles and NV 4.13, NV
A.17, and NV B.1. The CB also swerves (curves) on its way to the object ball (OB). The amount
of swerve depends on cue elevation, shot speed, and distance between the CB and OB. For
more information, see last month’s article and NV 4.14, NV 7.12, and NV B.1. Sometimes, the
phrase “effective squirt” or the term “squerve” is used to refer to the net effect of both squirt and
swerve on the shift in the CB position at OB impact (see my August ’07 and March ’08 articles for
more information). Finally, the OB gets thrown off the impact line (AKA “line of centers”) on its
way to the target. The amount of throw varies with cut angle, speed, top/bottom spin, and the
amount and type of English. When throw is due to cut angle only, it is called cut-induced throw
(CIT) and when it is due to English only it is called spin-induced throw (SIT) For more
information, see my August ’06 through July ’07 articles and NV 4.15, NV 4.16, NV A.21. If you
want to refer back to any of my past articles, they are all available on my website
(billiards.colostate.edu).

                                                                                   throw
                                           squirt      thrown OB
                                                                                   angle
                                           angle        direction
                            initial
                         CB direction
                                                                              impact line
                                                                         ("line of centers")

           typical cue                                                     right
            elevation                   aiming           curved        English (spin)
                          right
                         English          line          CB path           on CB
                                                        (swerve)

                    Diagram 1 All English effects: squirt, swerve, and throw
     Diagram 1 actually appeared in my May ’07 article dealing with throw. I mention this because
I received several messages from people wondering if there was an error with the throw direction
in the diagram. Apparently, some people think throw is always in the CIT direction (which would
be to the right of the impact line in Diagram 1) when there is a cut angle. Throw can be to the right or
left of the “line of centers” for any cut angle, depending on the amount of English. As shown in
my January ’07 article, if there is more outside English than “gearing outside English,” the OB will
be thrown toward the “inside” of the cut (to the left of the impact line, as shown in Diagram 1). If there
is inside English, or outside English less than the “gearing” amount, the OB will be thrown toward
the “outside” of the cut (to the right of the impact line in Diagram 1). I just wanted to clear that up
because several readers asked about it.
                    NV 4.13 – Squirt due to high speed English
                    NV 4.14 – English curve due to an elevated cue
                    NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
                    NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
                    NV 7.5 – Frozen ball throw
normal video
                    NV 7.6 – Frozen cue-ball throw
                    NV 7.12 – Small-curve massé shot
                    NV A.17 – English deflection (squirt) vs. speed
                    NV A.21 – Bank shot using throw and spin transfer
                    NV B.1 – Mike Page's squirt and swerve video

    Diagram 2 shows two examples illustrating the effects of speed and amount of English on
aim and throw. Both shots are using “outside English” (right English for a cut to the left, and left
English for a cut to the right). With the 1-ball shot, just the right speed is being used so swerve
exactly cancels squirt. As a result, the CB hits the OB exactly on the aiming line at the desired
“ghost-ball” target. The speed necessary for this depends on cue elevation, distance between the
CB and the OB, and table and ball conditions. Also, “gearing outside English” is being used, so
there is absolutely no throw (see my January ’07 article). The 1-ball heads exactly along the “line
of centers” impact line.

                                                       exaggerated
                          fast   "gearing"           squirt and swerve
                          medium  outside
                          slow    English                                     no throw
                                                                 1

                                             aiming line
                 typical cue elevation
                                                                              most throw
                                                                 2             with stun
                                   excess                                      at impact
                          fast
                          medium   outside         squirt with
                          slow     English        less swerve

               Diagram 2 The effects of speed and amount of English and aim and throw
     With the 2-ball shot, more speed and English are being used. Also, the CB is struck slightly
below center, creating stun at impact with the 2-ball (after the slight bottom spin wears off). With
this shot, the swerve hasn’t taken completely yet due to the higher speed. Therefore, the CB will
end up right of the aiming line due to squirt, and the shot would definitely miss to the left if there
were no throw. However, because the English is more than “gearing,” the 2-ball throws to the
right toward the pocket. Because the CB has stun at impact, the amount of throw will be much
larger than if the CB were rolling (see my October ’06 article). The end result of all of this is: the
2-ball goes in the pocket. However, if the speed, the amount of English and bottom spin, the
aiming line, or the cue elevation were changed, it is easy to miss the shot, especially if the
pockets are “tight.” For example, with less English, the 2-ball would actually throw the other way
(to the left); and depending on how you adjust your aim for squirt, you might miss the shot by a
large margin.

    Concerning the 1-ball shot in Diagram 2, you might be thinking: “Why shouldn’t I always use
gearing outside English with just the right speed (for the given shot distance) so swerve would
cancel squirt, and so there would be no throw, and both the CB and OB would always go exactly
where I’m aiming?” Unfortunately, this approach is not very practical, because position play and
bridging constraints often require us to vary cue elevation, speed, and English. Also, it is difficult
to have perfect intuition for exactly how much speed and English to use to have everything cancel
anyway. Squirt is fairly easy to predict for various shots (see my November ’07 article), but
swerve varies a lot with shot speed and distance, cue elevation, and table conditions. The best
we can do is to learn all of the effects (see my June ’07 and March ’08 articles for complete
summaries of all English effects) and practice a lot to develop solid intuition on how much to
adjust in different situations, based on the effects.

     Diagram 3 shows a rail cut shot that might look extremely difficult to some people but can be
relatively easy with the help of running (“natural”) English. The trick is to compensate for squirt
and be sure to hit the rail first. When the CB hits the rail with the running English, the CB heads
toward the 8-ball, helping to send it along the rail. There is a larger margin for error than you
might expect because the CB can hit the 8-ball during or after rail contact and still send the 8-ball
down the rail (more on this in a future article). If you have a cue with a natural pivot length well
matched to your bridge length, this is an example shot where back-hand-English (BHE) aim
compensation (for squirt) can be very effective (see my November ’07 article). With fast and/or
short shots like this, swerve is not as much a factor, so the CB heads relatively straight in the
squirt direction. Notice the aiming line in the diagram. Depending upon how much squirt your
cue has, your aim point can be well into the 8-ball. Again, the key to this shot is to have the CB
hit the rail with lots of running English to the left of the 8-ball (e.g., see HSV A.132).
                                                fast            significant
                                                medium          squirt with
                                                slow             very little
                                                                  swerve

                                                                               8
                                 CB path
                                for hitting
                               the rail first
                                                           aiming
                                                             line

                          Diagram 3 Firm rail cut shot with running English

                   HSV A.132 – rail cut-shot hitting the rail first, with natural (running) English
high-speed video

    One important issue when using English concerns whether or not you have a low-squirt cue.
In my December ’07 article, I made a case for some of the possible benefits of a low-squirt shaft
(e.g., Predator, OB-1, Universal SmartShaft, etc.). One thing I didn’t mention is if you are used to
adjusting your aim for squirt with a higher-squirt cue, it might be difficult to adjust to a low-squirt
cue (i.e., you will need to aim differently to compensate for the less squirt). I want to thank
“Cornerman” on the BD CCB online forum for encouraging me to not just focus on the
advantages of low-squirt cues. Other disadvantages include: a low-squirt shaft can be expensive,
usually has a small diameter taper and tip, and might change the balance and “feel” of your cue.

    I hope you have enjoyed and benefited from my many articles dealing with squirt, swerve,
and throw. Even if the information in the articles hasn’t helped you improve your game, you
should at least have a bunch of new excuses now when you miss shots. :) Seriously though, I
do hope you now have a better appreciation for all of the factors one must consider when using
English. If you’re tired of squirt/swerve/throw stuff, don’t despair ... I plan to cover a totally new
topic next month. Can you believe it?

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort
Collins, CO. He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated
Principles of Pool and Billiards,” and the DVD: “High-speed Video Magic.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/stalemate_or_smart_way_out.pdf
title: Stalemate Or Smart Way Out
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Stalemate, or Smart Way Out?”                                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    What would you do in the 8-ball situation shown in Image 1, with ball in hand, shooting stripes or solids?
Options were discussed recently on the AZBilliards forum; and online video NV J.109 demonstrates those
and other alternatives. Before reading on or looking ahead, study the layout some and try to figure out what
you would do in this situation.

                                        Image 1 Situation ball layout

Options for Stripes

      If shooting stripes, you are in a bad situation, but there are several reasonable options. You could try to
move the 3 and 4 a little to try to open a look at the 11. For example, by banking the 4 into the 3 with the CB
close to the end rail, you can leave the balls as shown in Image 2. This would be an intentional foul, giving
your opponent ball in hand, but you might get lucky and get a look at the 11 later, especially if the 4 were a
little closer to the 11. But as demonstrated by several examples in the video, if you move the balls too much,
your opponent can easily win the game.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      August, 2022
                                       Image 2 Move the solids a little

    Image 3 shows an example leave by hitting the bottom side of the 3 softly. That can open a look at the
11, but my opponent (with ball in hand) can play an easy safety by pocketing the 3-11 combo and locking up
the CB on the back side of the 4.

                                    Image 3 Open a small look at the 11

     The video demonstrates many more options for stripes, including attempting to tie up the 8 ball with the
solids to attempt to limit options; but as shown in the video, there are several good ways out for solids.
Another option is to just send the 8 to a tougher position, making a runout of the solids more difficult. A good
place to leave the 8 is in the middle of the top rail; and, as demonstrated in the video, the best way to do this

Billiards Digest                                                                                      August, 2022
to bank the 8 off the side rail. But then your opponent could just pocket the 11 and herd the 3 in with follow,
and then play a good safety behind the 4. A final low-percentage option for stripes is to jump onto the top of
the 11 to attempt to pocket the ball and get a look at the 8. I almost got it to work in the video, but this is a
desperate move.

    The best stripes could hope for is convincing solids to agree to a stalemate and re-break a new game, but
no smart player would accept such a proposition. Other than that, the best possible scenario for stripes,
assuming your opponent doesn’t see any good options, is to move the solids a little and hope to get a look or
kick at the 11 at some point. The video shows examples where this approach works out, but some luck (or
bad play by your opponent) is required.

Options for Solids

    Shooting solids, there are many good options to win the game. You can pocket the 11 and leave the CB
safe behind the 3 and 4 as shown in Image 4. From there, stripes is forced to go off two rails to get a hit on
the 8. And even if stripes gets a hit on the 8, solids will likely have a shot at the 3 or 4.

                                      Image 4 Hide behind the 3 and 4

    If the 3 were frozen to the 11 instead in the original ball layout, a good option would be to use backspin to
drive the 3 through the 11. As demonstrated in the video, this results in an easy out. However, with a gap
between the balls, this is tough to do, and you might sell out the game. Another option is to try to thin or
nudge the 3 to freeze it to the 11 first. If your opponent isn’t very savvy, he might leave it there, allowing you
to get the easy win with the backspin drive-through.

    Probably the best option for solids is to herd the 3 in after the 11 with follow. You can hide behind the 4,
ideally frozen to the back side. Or you can try to leave a gap between the CB and 4 as a two-way shot, as
shown in Image 5. If it ends up nearly straight, you have an easy out with short-side shape on the 4. If not,
you can play a finesse lock-up safety.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      August, 2022
                                    Image 5 Two-way shot with short-side shape

     Check out online video NV J.109. It provides demonstrations of everything in the article and more,
providing an in-depth look at this interesting situation. Even better, try out all the options on your own at a
table. That’s the only way you will know what choices are best for you if you come across a game situation
like this in the future.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.109 – STALEMATE or SMART WAY OUT? What Would You Do Here?
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      August, 2022
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/straight_rail_shots.pdf
title: Straight Rail Shots
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Straight Rail Shots”                                                       ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference
numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    Recently, I posted two videos online (NV J.5 and NV J.6) that cover straight rail shots, where both the
cue ball (CB) and object ball (OB) are frozen to a cushion on the same rail. Let’s look at all of the important
messages and lessons from the videos.

     Diagram 1 shows the first shot situation from a game of 8-ball where you need to draw straight back to
get a shot at the 8 next. As demonstrated in online video NV J.5, if you use straight draw (with no sidespin)
and aim this shot straight, you are very unlikely to pocket the ball and get the required shape. When you
watch the video, you might think I just didn’t aim carefully enough; but I assure you that I did aim and hit the
ball very straight. Do you know what is causing the miss here? As I show in the video, if the CB is off the
cushion, even just a small amount, the shot is fairly easy to execute. So why didn’t I make the shot with the
CB frozen to the cushion?

                                      Diagram 1 Straight rail draw shot

     Diagram 2 is an image from the video showing the reason why I missed the straight rail draw shot. When
the CB is frozen, part of the ball (highlighted in yellow) is actually under the nose of the cushion. So if the CB
hops at all (the white up arrow), the nose of the cushion will push the ball away from the rail (the white arrow
to the right) when the ball bounces up. The CB actually hops a small amount with most pool shots, especially
at faster speed, because if the cue extends over a rail, it always strikes the CB at a small downward angle,
which causes the ball to hop … like a mini jump shot. The video shows close-ups in slow motion so you can
clearly see how the ball hops and gets pushed away by the cushion with both draw and follow shots. With
follow shots, the CB hops even more, since the above-center hit deflects or squirts the CB downward slightly.
Note that results might vary on different tables due to differences in cushion nose height.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    November, 2018
                               Diagram 2 CB sitting under the cushion nose

     Diagram 3 shows an example follow shot that appears trivial to execute. You just need to roll the CB
straight to have it follow up for a shot at the 8 next. Wouldn’t you expect to easily get out from here? Well, it
is not as easy as you might think because, again, the cushion pushes the CB away from the rail making it
very easy to miss this shot.

     Now, it is possible to make this shot if you keep the cue as level as possible and use as little speed as
possible to limit how much the CB hops and gets pushed away from the cushion. In online video NV J.5, I
barely pocketed the 11 and barely got a look at the 8, so this type of shot is not easy. A better approach is to
use a shorter cue, like a jump cue, that you can get more level since it doesn’t need to clear over the rail for a
shot like this. With a level-cue center-ball hit, the CB would not bounce at all. With an above-center hit for
follow, it is best to angle the cue upward slightly so the downward deflection (or squirt) of the CB cancels the
upward angle of the cue, resulting in no hop. I demonstrate how to do this in the video using a finger-tip grip,
which is a little awkward but necessary.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    November, 2018
                                     Diagram 3 Straight rail follow shot

     Diagram 4 illustrates another way to deal with straight rail shots. Here, there is an added concern since
you are shooting past a side pocket. This example is from Disc V of the “Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and
Ten-ball (VENT),” which teaches all of the skills, knowledge and strategy you need to excel at 9-ball and 10-
ball. As I demonstrate in online video NV J.5, I am able to pocket the 9 with a soft straight shot with a near-
level cue on my table. However, as I demonstrate, trying the same shot from the opposite side of my table
does not work because the right pocket point sticks out a hair more than the left point, so the pocket spits the
CB away from the rail. The way to avoid this (or the cushion spit-out effect described above) is to hit the CB
slightly away from the cushion and swerve it back past the side pocket. In the diagram, bottom-left english
with slight cue elevation and medium-soft speed gets the job done. With a shot like this, it is better to hit the
OB with the CB a hair off the cushion slightly so the spin-induced throw to the right will cancel the cut toward
the cushion, sending the OB straight down the rail. Note that you need to aim differently depending on your
shaft’s CB deflection, your cue elevation, and cloth conditions, so be sure to practice shots like this.

     As demonstrated in online video NV J.6, a technique similar to the one just described can also be used to
execute the draw shot in Diagram 1. With the cue as level as possible and with a small amount of inside
spin, the draw shot can be pocketed. With a near-level cue, the upward CB deflection cancels some of the
cue elevation. Also, the inside spin allows the CB to swerve back a little and throw the OB to help straighten
it. This shot isn’t easy; but with a little practice, you can add another weapon to your pool arsenal.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   November, 2018
                                                   Diagram 4 @@@

    I hope you now have an improved understanding of straight rail shot effects and techniques. As always,
check out the online videos when you get a chance. Like most things, it is better to see things rather than just
read about them. Better yet, try the shots out yourself at a table. Only with practice can you develop the
confidence necessary to execute these sorts of shots when they come up in important games.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.5 – Straight Rail Shot Effects, and Shooting Past a Side Pocket
normal video
                    NV J.6 – Straight Frozen Cushion Shots and Techniques ... Follow Up

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    November, 2018
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/stroke_align_aim_drills.pdf
title: Stroke Align Aim Drills
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Stroke/Align/Aim Drills”                                                 ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    To be a good pool player, you must be able to aim, align, and stroke accurately and consistently. I
recently posted an online video (NV J.35) that demonstrates the top 10 most useful drills to help you develop
and improve these important skills. I summarize some of the highlights below.

1. Test Stroke Straightness

    The first drill is a very simple way to test stroke straightness. As shown in Photo 1, just stroke directly
over a rail cushion line to make sure the cue remains over the line during the entire stroke. As demonstrated
in the video, another simple way to test stroke straightness is to stroke between two vertical golf tees.
Obviously, if you don’t follow through straight, the tees will move. You can move the tees closer together as
you improve.

                             Photo 1 Stroking Over Cushion Line on the Rail

2. Mirror Check

     As shown in Photo 2, a mirror can be very useful to check your vision center alignment and stroke
straightness. You can also adjust your stance and head orientation in front of the mirror to try to find a
comfortable way to get your face squarer with your eyes more level. For more information and advice, see
the “vision center” and “finding your perfect stance” videos linked in the video description.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      May, 2020
                       Photo 2 Using a Mirror to Check Aim, Alignment, and Stroke

3. Hitting Balls into a Pocket

     A good drill for beginners to practice straight-line aim, alignment, and stroke is to shoot each of a row of
balls into a corner pocket bridging on the far short rail. As always, be sure to keep your head and body as still
as possible during each stroke. If you cannot make 10 in a row, you might want to get some help from an
instructor.

4. MOFUDAT

     Photo 3 shows the setup for MOFUDAT … the MOst Famous and Useful Drill of All Time. The goal is to
hit the cue ball (CB) up and down the table and have it come straight back to the tip. It can help to put a golf
tee on the far rail to serve as a clear aiming target. It is also helpful to use “sentinel” balls to demand an
accurate contact point on the cushion. You can narrow the sentinel ball gap as you improve. Be sure to stay
down and still until the CB comes back to your tip. This is a good way to practice and reinforce the important
habit of not jumping up on your shots. If your aim is off the CB will not hit the cushion target accurately and
the CB will not come back straight. If you have good aim but don’t hit the CB exactly on the vertical
centerline, the CB will hit the cushion at the right place but will not come back straight. As demonstrated in
the video, if you use a stripe instead of the CB, the stripe will stay vertical only with a very good centered hit.
If you hit the CB off center, even a hair, the stripe will wobble slightly.

    If you really want to test your aim, alignment, and stroke, use backspin. The drag action intensifies the
effect of any unintentional sidespin. A good hit is much more difficult to achieve with backspin. With just a
hair of right, the CB rebounds to your right. And with a hair of left, the CB goes left. And if all of this is too
easy for you, add more speed. Stroke accuracy and consistency are usually worse with faster speed.

                                              Photo 3 MOFUDAT

Billiards Digest                                                                                          May, 2020
5. Line of Straight Stop Shots

     The video contains several ball-pocketing drills to test your aim, alignment, and stroke. First, just set up a
line of balls across the table and place the CB for a long, straight shot on each. The goal is to hit stop shots
as well as you can. If your aim is off, the CB will not stop in place; and if you have any sidespin, it will clearly
reveal itself. That’s why you want to strive for a stop shot … so you can clearly identify your errors. As you
improve, add more balls and increase the shot distance. Try to get to the point where you can make 10 in a
row from long distance. If you miss any, start over and repeat until you make all 10 without a miss.

6. Short Stop/Follow/Draw in Side

    For a simple drill to test stroke straightness and basic CB control, place the CB is in the center of the
table and an object ball (OB) halfway to a side pocket. First try to hit 5 stop shots in a row. Then follow the
CB into the same pocket, again trying for 5 in a row. Then draw back to scratch in the opposite side 5 times
in a row. People usually have much more trouble with the draw shots. See my recent Top 10 draw-shot
technique advice video linked in the video description if you want or need some help.

7. Practice Long, Straight Stop/Follow/Draw

     This drill involves a long shot along the table-diagonal, where the OB is halfway between the CB and
pocket, making the shot as tough as possible. To ensure the shot is straight, it helps to carefully place and
mark the CB and OB positions with donut stickies. First, try to pocket 10 stops shots in a row. If you have
any unintentional sidespin, the CB will turn in place. If you have any bottom spin remaining at the OB, the CB
will draw back slightly. And if your aim is off, the CB will drift sideways. Again, strive for a perfect stop shot
with no sidespin.

    Then practice follow shots, trying to make the ball and scratch at least 5 times in a row. You will be able
to do this only with good aim and alignment, and with an accurate stroke. Again, be sure to be still, and focus
on your fundamentals. Then try to pocket the ball and draw back for a scratch. This shot is a real tester,
especially on cloth that is not very slick or fast. If you can get 1 or more out of 5, you are doing well.

     In addition to marking the CB and OB positions, it is also helpful to mark your straight follow-through
position. That way you can check if your follow through was straight or not after each shot by seeing if the tip
finishes over the follow-through mark.

8. Progressive Stop/Follow/Draw

      The next set of drills is from the first Billiard University (BU) Playing Ability Exam. If you want to see
Shane VanBoening and other pros taking the BU Exams, see the link in the video description. The BU Exam
drills are scored and are called progressive drills, because when you do poorly the drills get easier; and when
you do well, they get harder. Progressive practice pool drills were first developed by Bob Jewett, my co-
author on the Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).

     The first drill is for stop shots, where you start with the CB 4 diamonds from a corner pocket. If you stop
the CB to within a ball of the stop-shot target close to the pocket, you move the CB back a diamond. And if
you don’t, you move forward a diamond. The longest distance is 7 diamonds, and any shot you make from
this position counts as a bonus point. Your score is the final CB position after 10 shots plus the number of
bonus points. With no misses, the maximum possible score is 14. Keep a log of you scores so you can see
how you improve over time.

    With the progressive follow drill, the goal is to pocket an OB and have the CB end up in a target paper
rectangle. The CB moves as before and the OB is always 1 diamond in front of the CB. Again, when you
miss, you move the CB forward a diamond.

      With the progressive draw drill, the goal is to pocket an OB close to a corner and draw the CB back into a
2x1 diamond area below the side pocket. Again, with each success, you move the CB back 1 diamond. This
drill can be difficult, especially if you are not very good at draw shots. Again, see the link in the video
description if you want to improve.

Billiards Digest                                                                                           May, 2020
9. Progressive Cut Shots

    The video also shows a progressive drill for practicing cut shots. You can do this drill with different OB
and CB locations, but the setup shown in the video is recommended. As with the other progressive drills, you
move the CB to easier positions when you miss and to more difficult positions when you succeed. Don’t
forget to log your scores so you can track improvement over time. And set target-score goals to give you
something to work toward. That makes practice more fun and it adds a little competitive pressure.

10. Shot-Making Drill

    The last drill was developed by Colin Colenso for testing and rating a player’s shot-making skills. It
consists of 16 different shots, 8 from each side of the table, as shown in Photo 4. There are 6 different CB
positions and 8 OBs that are pocketed in the corner. The ball positions are easy to locate relative to the
diamonds, but they don’t need to be placed perfectly. There is a diagram you can print at the link in the video
description.

    You get one point for each ball pocketed. You are not penalized for a scratch. If you do each of the 16
shots 5 times, the total possible score is 80. Alternatively, you can do each shot only twice and multiply your
point total by 2.5; or you can do each shot only once and multiply your point total by 5. Either way, the
maximum possible score is 80. Again, always keep track of your scores so you can see how you improve
over time. At the link in the video description, there is a rating system that relates your total score to an
approximate level of ability on the standard ABCD scale, your expected BU Exam scores, expected league
handicaps, and your predicted Fargo Rating.

                                     Photo 4 Colin Colenso’s Potting Drill

      I hope the information in this article helps you improve your aiming, alignment, and stoking skills.
Everything described is demonstrated in online video NV J.35. Be sure to watch the video and try out the
drills the next time you practice. If you want more information, links to many supporting resources can be
found in the YouTube video description. Have fun with the drills.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV J.35 – Top 10 Aim, Alignment, and STROKE DRILLS
normal video

Billiards Digest                                                                                      May, 2020
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   May, 2020
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/stroke_tuneup_bd_coaching_bonus.pdf
title: MAY_StrokeTuneup.indd
topics: cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
INSTRUCTION SPECIAL

                                                                                                                                             LAWRENCE LUSTIG
                                                                     STROKE
                                                                     TUNEUP               BD Coaching Bonus

           SHOOT STRAIGHT WITH OUR FUNDAMENTALS CHECKLIST
           By Dave Alciatore Ph.D., with Mason King

                                                                           checklist you can clip out and take to the practice room,
           W     e all love it when we’re in the zone — when the stroke
                 is effortless, instinctive and always on the money. But
           the zone is usually a temporary residence, and it’s easy for
                                                                           with a drill for testing your stroke accuracy.
                                                                             One word of advice: One stroke won’t fit all. People
           your stroke to get out of whack for any one of a thousand       come in all ages, shapes and sizes, and the most effec-
           reasons — if not all 1,000 reasons.                             tive stance, grip and practice-stroke routine for your buddy
             Sometimes you have to take your distressed stroke to the      might not be the best for you or your lady friend. The key
           practice room and break it down step by step. BD columnist      words are “comfort” and “consistency.” Find a stable,
           David Alciatore, Ph.D. — known in our online forum as “Dr.      stress-free routine that works, and keep it up on every shot.
           Dave” — can help with the diagnosis.                            It’ll be easier to identify problems and make future adjust-
             On the following pages, we expound on stroke fundamen-        ments if you have a constant regimen from the start.
           tals catalogued by the doctor to help you identify the steps      Find your flaws, straighten them out, ingrain your new
           you might be missing or stumbling over. At the end is a         routine, and you’ll be back in the zone in no time.

     46      BILLIARDS DIGEST       May 2008

MAY_StrokeTuneup.indd 46                                                                                                            5/1/08 1:29:40 PM
                                                                                            Dave’s Stroke Fundamentals
                                                                                            Is your stroke out of sorts? Can’t find the culprit? Let’s break the
                                                                                            process down into separate steps and establish a solid routine.

                                                                          CUE AND TIP INSPECTION                                                Check your cue, ferrule and tip ... ... and chalk up.
                                                                          THIS IS a simple equipment check. Your cue must be straight
                                                                          and unwarped. If you have any doubts, the bar test is always ef-
                                                                          fective — rolling the cue (or just the shaft) on the slate bed. The
                                                                          ideal shape of your tip is between that of a nickel and a dime,
                                                                          depending on preference. The tip must have some texture (i.e.,
                                                                          not too smooth), so it can hold some chalk — which must be
                                                                          applied on every shot). Make sure your hands and cue shaft are
                                                                          clean and dry.

                                                                          GRIP ON THE CUE
                                                                          THE KEY words are “relaxed” and “light.” A loose grip allows the
                                                                          hand to pivot in the pendulum-stroke motion. Holding the cue in
                                                                          a death-grip inhibits smooth acceleration by tightening your arm,
                                                                          wrist and elbow. And watch out for unconsciously squinching
                                                                          your grip on the forward stroke, especially when you need power.
                                                                          ● THERE’S MUCH debate about where in the hand to cradle the
                                                                          cue — in the fingers, in the palm, or in that sweet spot in be-
                                                                          tween. There’s no single answer. Some hands are big, some are
                                                                          small, some have arthritis. The important thing is to grip lightly.
                                                                          ● PLACE YOUR grip hand on the cue so that your forearm will be
                                                                          perpendicular (i.e., at a 90-degree angle) to the cue when the
                                                                          tip strikes the cue ball. Assuming that you’re using a pendulum
                                                                          stroke, this will ensure that the cue is moving straight forward
                                                                          at impact (not tilting up or down) and that your tip placement on
                                                                                                                                                Keep a loose grip.
                                                                          the cue ball is as accurate as possible.

                                                                          HAND BRIDGE
                                                                          THE KEY to an effective bridge is stability. Spread your fingers
                                                                          to plant the bridge hand on the table. ● WHETHER YOU use an
                                                                          open or closed bridge is a matter of personal preference. I use
                                                                          the open bridge, because I can sight the cue better, and it’s easy
                                                                          to form a stable “V” between the thumb and forefinger. Some
                                                                          people prefer the looped-forefinger closed bridge, which provides
                                                                          multiple points of contact for guiding the cue (but can create
                                                                          too much friction if your hand and shaft are sweaty or dirty). ●
 CUES PHOTO BY HUGH TIERNAN; BRIDGES BY JONATHAN SMITH; LAWRENCE LUSTIG

                                                                          THERE’S SOME debate on bridge length — the distance between
                                                                          the bridge and cue ball. A shorter bridge (4 to 6 inches) may allow
                                                                          more accurate tip placement, and diminish the effects of a back
                                                                          hand that wanders left or right. A longer bridge (8 to 12 inches)
                                                                          allows you to accelerate your stroke more smoothly and build
                                                                          power. Six to 8 inches is good advice for most players and shots.     Open bridge                  Closed bridge

                                                                          STANCE                                                                Sight the aiming line.            Stay comfortably low.
                                                                          SIGHT THE aiming line for the shot prior to taking your stance,
                                                                          establish that line with your cue stick, and then step into that
                                                                          aiming line when assuming your stance and positioning your
                                                                          cue. ● I DON’T think there is one correct position for your feet.
                                                                          It varies from player to player, depending on comfort level. What
                                                                          matters is to be comfortable, well-balanced and stable, as long
                                                                          as the stick can come forward on the aiming line. And use a
                                                                          consistent stance from shot to shot. ● POSITION YOUR head low
                                                                          enough to accurately read the aiming line. I like my head to be
                                                                          as low as possible, like snooker players. But your head and torso
                                                                          positions will depend on what’s comfortable for you.

                                                                                                                                                                     May 2008       BILLIARDS DIGEST         47

MAY_StrokeTuneup.indd 47                                                                                                                                                                                5/1/08 1:29:46 PM
             INSTRUCTION SPECIAL: STROKE TUNEUP
                                                                                                  Check your alignment:
                                                                                                      Aiming line, arm,
          AIMING AND ALIGNMENT                                                                             cue and eye.
          FOR SHOTS that don’t require left or right English, your
          contact point should be on the vertical centerline of the
          cue ball. In the pool course I teach, it’s shocking how
          many people think they’re hitting the centerline but are
          way off. ● TO HELP with this, assume a “set and aim” po-
          sition, with your focus on the cue ball and the cue tip just
          short of the desired cue-ball contact point. Pause here.
          Your forearm should be perpendicular (i.e., at a 90-degree
          angle) to the cue. Now you can double-check your aiming
          line, making sure that your stroking arm, cue and head (or,
          specifically, the dominant aiming eye or chin) are aligned
          with the aiming line and object
          ball. ● THE DOMINANT eye is a            Get ‘set’ and aim
          huge can of worms. Some people           before stroking.
          prefer their dominant eye over
          the cue, and others like the cue
          under the chin. Some don’t have a
          dominant eye. (Check the Novem-
          ber 2007 BD for Tony Robles’s
          advice on cue position.) If you can
          align your tip with the aiming line,
          I don’t think it matters where your
          head is. But, however you decide
          to set up, do it consistently.

          STROKE PREPARATION
          BEGIN A series of practice strokes. On every shot, you want
          the use the same number of practice strokes with the same
          tempo. You’re establishing a routine that you can rely on
          in more stressful moments. You’re also making sure the
          stroking arm is free from body interference. ● THERE’S
          SOME debate on where to rest your gaze. You can move
          your focus between the cue ball and object ball during the
          practice strokes (e.g., watch the object ball during the back
          stroke and cue ball during the forward stroke). Just be sure
          to watch the cue ball during the forward stroke, so you don’t
          accidentally hit it. Whatever you choose, do it consistently.
          ● AT THE end of your last forward practice stroke, pause
          again in the set position. Re-verify your aiming line and
          tip placement. ● TAKE A slow and smooth backswing and

                                                                                                                              ALL PHOTOS BY LAWRENCE LUSTIG, EXCEPT TONY ROBLES (MIDDLE) BY JONATHAN SMITH
          pause at the end before starting your forward swing. Switch
                                                                           Pause on backswing (left)
          your focus to the object ball (or other target point, depend-
                                                                           and watch the object ball.
          ing on the shot). You also can focus on the object point at
          the start of the backswing; whatever works for you is fine.

          STROKE EXECUTION                                                    Freeze on follow.      Keep elbow up.
          THIS IS the most important point on the list: Transition
          smoothly from your pause to your forward swing. Many
          intermediate players have difficulty with accuracy because
          they rush or jerk their cue sticks forward, which throws
          them off-line. ● ASSUMING YOU’RE using the pendulum-
          style stroke, make sure your elbow stays up. (Many elbow-
          droppers dispute this point, but most people will have better
          accuracy and consistency if they don’t drop their elbows.)
          ● AS YOU’RE accelerating through the stroke, be careful
          that your bridge, head and body stay fixed. A frequent sin,
          even with good players, is moving the body up on the shot.
          ● ALLOW THE cue tip to pass through the original cue ball
          position to the natural end of the stroke. Then freeze in your
          follow-through position until the balls stop moving (unless
          you need to get out of the way).

     48      BILLIARDS DIGEST        May 2008

MAY_StrokeTuneup.indd 48                                                                                           5/1/08 1:29:54 PM
        Stroke Tuneup Checklist
        Stroke
        Clip it or copy it, andTuneup                 Checklist
                               take it to the poolroom!
        (Developed by BD Columnist David Alciatore, Ph.D.)

        1. CENTERLINE STROKE DRILL
        This exercise will test your aim, cue-tip placement accuracy, and stroke.
                                                                                                        A. Use a medium-speed, above-
                                                                                                        center hit to send the striped ball
                                                                                                        up table and back. Align the stripe
                                                                                                        with the shot direction before
                                                                        Optional balls to make          shooting.
                                                                        target point more clear         B. Observe any wobble in the
                                                                                                        stripe, indicating an off-center hit.
                                                                                                        C. Stay down in a “freeze” posi-
                                                                                                        tion after the stroke and observe
                                                                                                        how close the ball returns to the
                                                                                                        cue tip. A close return indicates
                                                                                                        good aim and a good stroke.
                                                                                                        D. Execute the shot 10 times, not-
                                                                                                        ing how many attempts produce
                                                                                                        little wobble and return to the tip.
                                                                                                        E. Repeat A-D with center-ball and
                                                                                                        below-center tip positions to see
                                                                                                        which works best for you.

        2. STROKE FUNDAMENTALS — “BEST PRACTICES”
        Break down and address all the elements of your stroke to find strengths and weaknesses.
        C AT E G O R Y     BEST PRACTICES                                                          C O M M E N T S/ O B S E R VAT I O N S
        Cue and Tip        • Straight, unwarped cue
        Inspection         • Comfortable length and weight (commonly 19 oz.)
                           • Ferrule tight and uncracked
                           • Well-shaped tip, between dime and nickle shape
                           • Tip holds chalk well (not too smooth)
                           • Hand and cue shaft clean and dry
                           • Tip chalked and checked before every shot

        Grip               • Cue held with a relaxed and light cradle
                           • Wrist aligned with forearm (i.e., not unnecessarily cocked)
                           • Cue positioned in grip so that the forearm will be perpendicular
                             to the cue (i.e., 90-degree angle) at cue-ball impact

        Hand Bridge        • Solid foundation on table or rail, with the fingers spread for a
                             wide contact area
                           • Stable and tight guide for the cue, whether open or closed
                           • Comfortable distance from cue ball, typically 4 to 12 inches
                             depending on the requirements of the shot

        Stance             • Sight the aiming line for the shot prior to taking stance, and
                             then step into the line when assuming stance
                           • Consistent feet placement from shot to shot (for example, with
                             the rear foot on the aiming line)
                           • Settle into position with weight well balanced
                           • Position head low enough over the cue to accurately read the
                             aiming line, but still at a comfortable height
                           • Make sure stance is comfortable and stable

                                                        ( C o n t i nu e d o n n e x t p a g e )
                                                                                                   May 2008           BILLIARDS DIGEST          49

MAY_StrokeTuneup.indd 49                                                                                                                 5/1/08 1:30:02 PM
          STROKE FUNDAMENTALS (CONTINUED)
          C AT E G O R Y        BEST PRACTICES                                                          C O M M E N T S/ O B S E R VAT I O N S

          Aim and               • Assume a distinct “set and aim” position, with tip close to cue
          Alignment               ball and eyes focused on cue ball
                                • At set position, with tip close to cue ball, forearm should be
                                  perpendicular (i.e., 90-degree angle) to cue
                                • Make sure that tip will strike cue ball on the vertical centerline
                                  on shots that don’t require left of right English
                                • Make sure that stroking arm, cue and head (or, specifically,
                                  the dominant aiming eye or chin) are aligned with the aiming
                                  line (i.e., the same vertical plane)
                                • Hold cue to be as level as possible (i.e., not elevated)

          Stroke                • Complete a series of straight warmup strokes, making sure to
          Preparation             have a consistent routine on every shot with the same tempo
                                  and number of strokes
                                • Make sure that the stroking arm is free and not encumbered
                                  by the body
                                • Pause in the set position at the end of the last warmup stroke
                                  and prior to backswing
                                • Switch gaze from cue ball to target point as desired, but
                                  always employing a consistent routine (e.g., cue ball to target
                                  point)
                                • Take a slow and smooth final backswing
                                • Employ a distinct pause at end of backswing, careful not to
                                  jerk cue
                                • Focus on your target before the final forward swing

          Stroke                • Transition smoothly from back-swing to forward-swing (i.e., no
          Execution               jerk, rapid acceleration, or other body movement)
                                • Keep elbow stationary for pendulum effect
                                • Accelerate cue smoothly
                                • Forearm should be perpendicular to cue at cue-ball contact
                                • Make sure that the grip, bridge, head and the rest of the body
                                  stay relaxed but stationary through the shot
                                • Allow cue tip to pass through the original cue-ball position to
                                  the natural end of the stroke
                                • Freeze in the follow-through position (watch out for head move-
                                  ment as you attempt to see shot results)

          3. STROKE ROUTINE SUMMARY (AKA, “SWPPPGAFFD”)
          Here’s an easier-to-digest summary of the suggested stroke, with an epic acronym. If you miss, remember to “diagnose.”
          Stance      Set and   Warm-up     Pause       Pull the      Pause at end     Gaze at         Accelerate   Follow    Freeze    Diagnose
                      Aim       Strokes     and Set     cue back      of back-swing    object ball     forward      through
                                                        smoothly                                       smoothly

                                                               Modeled by Chris McDaniel, promotional coordinator at Colorado Cue Club in Denver
     50      BILLIARDS DIGEST         May 2008

MAY_StrokeTuneup.indd 50                                                                                                                     5/1/08 1:30:02 PM
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/stroke_video_analysis.pdf
title: Stroke Video Analysis
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Stroke Video Analysis”                                                        ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    In recent online video NV L.17, I discuss and demonstrate how I do video stroke analysis in our Billiard
University (BU) Boot Camps, which we hold four times a year. The video analysis activity is a student favorite
since it helps identify key deficiencies that, when corrected, can help bring student games to the next level.
You can use our video analysis approach to try to diagnose and fix stroke issues on your own. The video also
shows examples of common stroke flaws we routinely see in our Boot Camp students. Some examples from
pros are also included. This column summarizes important techniques and advice from the video.

     The video stroke analysis document linked in the YouTube video description illustrates the recommended
camera views and describe the shots for the video analysis. As shown in Diagram 1, there are 3 shots filmed
from 3 different directions. The first shot is straight draw recorded from the side, where the goal is to hit the 1
into the 2 and bring the cue ball (CB) back to the head cushion. You can use any camera to record the shots,
including a smartphone on a cheap tripod. The second shot is straight follow filmed from behind, where the
goal is to hit the 1 into the 2 and send the CB forward with enough speed to rebound off the end cushion back
to the head rail. If you hit this shot nearly perfectly, the 1 will kiss back off the 2 and interfere with the CB; but
this is very difficult to do, so consider it a challenge. The third shot is a cut into the bottom-right corner.

                                       Diagram 1 Ball and camera setup

    In the video, we demonstrate technique flaws we often find and fix with our Boot Camp students. If you
don’t know what to look for in video analysis, the “best practices” check list document linked in the YouTube
video description can be helpful. With the side-view draw shot (see Image 1), the main things we look for are:

     •    Is the tip low enough and close to the CB at address? If not, you won’t get enough draw.

Billiards Digest                                        1                                                  March, 2024
     •    Is the forearm perpendicular to the cue at CB address? If your grip is too far forward, you won’t have
          room for a complete follow through. If your grip is too far back, the tip might rise during the stroke into
          the CB.

     •    Is the cue as level as possible? If not, even a tiny amount of unintentional sidespin will cause CB
          swerve, sending the 1 offline.

     •    Is the backstroke slow and is the transition from the back to forward stroke relaxed and non-rushed? If
          not, you will have poor accuracy and consistency.

     •    Is the cue accelerated smoothly resulting in follow through? Stroke deceleration will result in poor
          speed control and consistency, and less draw.

     •    Does the grip remain relaxed during the entire stroke? Tightening your grip during the stroke will cause
          the tip to drop, which can result in a scoop shot. Tightening your entire arm during the stroke will cause
          the cue to rise, which usually results in less draw. Jerking the cue back after the hit can result in less
          draw since it involves tension.

     •    Does the head and body remain still during and after the shot? If not, it is unlikely your stroke will be
          straight.

     •    Does shoulder motion and elbow drop occur before CB contact? Dropping your elbow before hitting
          the CB will cause the tip to rise, resulting in less draw. There is nothing wrong with collapsing your
          shoulder and dropping your elbow after the hit, assuming your timing is consistent and not early.

The video shows examples of good strokes, including one from world-class pro Aloysius Yapp.

                                           Image 1 Draw shot side view

     With the rear-view fast follow shot (see Image 2), the main things we look for are:

     •    Is the forearm vertical at CB address? Having your elbow out with a pre-stroke “chicken wing” will
          make it difficult to stroke straight.

     •    Does the arm “chicken wing” out during the stroke? Moving your shoulder and elbow during the stroke
          into the ball can cause major problems with everything.

     •    Is there unnecessary slop in the grip? Having a gap between the cue and the web of your hand can
          affect stroke and tip contact point accuracy, especially if you tighten your grip at all during the stroke.

     •    Does the grip tighten during the stroke? This will cause the tip to lower, resulting in less follow distance.

Billiards Digest                                         2                                                  March, 2024
     •    Does the wrist turn during the stroke? If so, it is unlikely the stroke will be straight.

                                           Image 2 Follow shot rear view

     With the front-view cut shot (see Image 3), the main things we look for are:

     •    Is there a methodical and purposeful pre-shot routine?

     •    Is the face square to the shot with the eyes level? Many students have their face non-square, with their
          nose pointing away from the shot. This can cause shot line perception errors, especially if the face
          angle is not consistent. Not having your eyes level can also cause shot line perception errors.

     •    Is the player’s vision center aligned properly? Not having your personal vision center aligned properly
          relative to the cue causes shot-line perception errors. Having your vision center too far to your left
          usually results in the CB going right. And having your vision center too far to your right usually results
          in the CB going left. For more information and help, see the videos and other resources at the link in
          the YouTube video description.

     •    Does the player “aim while standing?” Aiming when down in your stance, instead of while standing
          above the shot line, is usually not very effective.

     •    Does the player drop their head straight down into the stance? Not dropping the “shot picture” straight
          down into your stance usually results in bad alignment and aim. Focusing on the CB during the drop
          (instead of the OB) makes it much harder to arrive at the correct aim and alignment in the stance.

     •    Is there a good eye pattern? Having a rushed eye pattern with no settled focus on the OB before the
          stroke can hurt accuracy and consistency. Focusing on the CB before and during the final stroke is
          usually less effective than OB focus for most people. Moving your eyes during or right after the hit to
          see where the OB is going can often result in pre-hit stroke steer.

Billiards Digest                                          3                                              March, 2024
                                            Image 3 Cut shot front view

     I want to thank pro players Aloysius Yapp and Sharik Sayed for letting us use their shot clips in our video.
We hope this video helps you do your own stroke video analysis and find possible flaws in your mechanics that
might be hurting your game. Lots of help with improving your fundamentals can be found via the online tutorial
linked in the YouTube video description. And if you want to raise your game to the next level, consider joining
us for an upcoming BU Boot Camp.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV L.17 – Stroke Video Analysis … How to Find and Fix Technique Flaws
   normal video

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                         4                                                 March, 2024
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/swoop_experiment.pdf
title: Swoop Experiment
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Swoop Experiment”                                                          ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

    Recently, I performed a set of experiments to determine whether or not more spin can be applied to the
cue ball (CB) by swooping/swiping/pivoting the cue during the stroke. The alternative is to use a straight
stroke with the cue aligned in the desired direction with the desired tip offset (for a desired amount of
sidespin) before the stroke. Online Video NV F.2 demonstrates both types of strokes, shows all of the
procedures used in the experiments, and summarizes all of the results.

     Diagram 1 shows the setup used for the experiment. An Elephant Practice Ball was used for checking
tip-contact points on the ball after each shot. Rulers were taped to the rails to ensure accurate aim on the first
cushion and to measure the angle change due to sidespin at the second cushion. The cue was kept as level
as possible during most of the tests and a consistent speed was used in all comparisons made. When doing
comparative tests, it is very important to use as level a cue as possible to minimize swerve effects, and to
strive for tip contact points at the same heights … ideally on the horizontal centerline of the CB. If a
downward swoop is used or if the tip is aimed below center, bottom spin will be imparted, causing drag action
on the cloth that slows the CB, without reducing the sidespin. This increases the effect of the sidespin and
will widen the angle off the cushion. These effects are demonstrated in NV F.2.

                               Diagram 1 Table setup for swoop experiment

    In the experiment, I attempted to create as much spin as possible with both a swoop stroke and straight
stroke. Again, the cue was kept as level as possible with each shot, with almost no clearance above the rail,
and the goal was to hit the CB on the horizontal centerline as close to the miscue limit as possible. The 11
and 13 balls were placed to ensure an accurate hit on the first cushion. With an accurate hit, the CB narrowly
misses the 13 on the way in; and with significant spin, the CB narrowly misses the 11 on the way out. Again,
the main goal was to determine if more spin can be created with a swoop stroke as compared to a straight
stroke. I threw out any attempts that did not have close to a horizontal-centerline hit on the CB, were not at a
consistent speed, or did not hit the first cushion at the same spot. I also tested a high-squirt (large CB

Billiards Digest                                                                                      August, 2015
deflection) cue with a soft tip to see if the results differed from a low-squirt (small CB deflection) Predator Z-2
with a medium-hard tip. I took 25-30 shots with each set of tests and only included the top four shots from
each group in NV F.2. For comparison purposes, I decided to average only the two middle values of the top
four with each set of tests, because they were a more-representative average of the best.

     If you watch online video NV F.2, you will notice that the lines of aim for the low deflection (LD) vs. high
deflection (HD) shafts and the straight vs. swoop strokes were different to create the same CB direction into
the first rail. This is because the different amount of squirt (CB deflection) requires different aim
compensation, and the swoop motion creates a slightly different effective line of action and spin for a given tip
offset. The swoop effects are illustrated in Diagram 2. Both of these shots create the same effective tip
offset and the same amount of spin on the CB. The CB also heads the same direction for both shots. With
the swoop stroke, the cue is aiming more to the right at contact, and the actual tip offset from center is less as
compared to the straight stroke. However, the sideways swooping motion effectively changes the direction of
the cueing force, thereby creating a larger effective tip offset from center. With the straight stroke, the aim is
slightly different, along the CB direction (ignoring squirt or CB deflection), and the tip offset from center is the
same as the effective tip offset with the swoop stroke. Again both of these strokes result in the same CB
direction and the same amount of spin.

                               Diagram 2 Comparison of swoop and straight strokes

     Table 1 summarizes the results of the experiment. First of all, the average amount of sidespin generated
for the LD and HD shafts were pretty much identical (9.6 vs. 9.5), given the margin for error in the experiment.
An LD shaft cannot create more spin, like some people think. (For more info, see “LD shaft - getting more
spin” on the “cue” page in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.) With the swoop stroke, I was not able
to create quite as much spin as with the straight strokes (8.9 vs. 9.6). It should be possible to create the
same amount of spin, but it is much more difficult to be consistent and accurate with the swoop stroke,
especially when attempting to push the miscue limit. However, unlike some people think, a swoop stroke
cannot create more spin than a straight stroke. As illustrated in Diagram 2 and described above, for any
swoop stroke, it is possible to create the equivalent shot of the same CB direction and same spin with a
straight stroke.

                             Table 1 Results of swoop vs. straight stroke experiment

                                                  position on second rail (amount of sidespin)
                   stroke type        shaft             middle two of
                                                                                   average
                                                      best four values
                                       LD                  9.4, 9.8                   9.6
                    straight
                                       HD                  9.4, 9.6                   9.5
                     swoop             LD                  8.5, 9.3                   8.9

Billiards Digest                                                                                        August, 2015
     Now, for some people, there still might be some possible advantages to a swoop stroke. An alternative is
to use back-hand english (BHE), where you align and aim center-ball and then pivot the cue before the final
stroke (by moving the back hand with the bridge hand still) to apply the desired amount of sidespin. (For
more information about BHE, see the videos and articles on the BHE resource page under “english” in the
FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.) If using BHE instead of a swoop, the pivoting before the stroke can
be awkward, uncomfortable or unnatural to some people. For one, the pivoting points the cue in a direction
different from where you want the CB to head (to compensate for squirt or CB deflection). This might not look
right to some people. Also, the pre-stroke pivot can require a shift in stance while down on the shot, which
some people might not like.

    Some people prefer aiming center ball in the direction they want the CB to head, and then swoop during
the stroke to apply english. If the bridge is at the correct distance from the CB (for the given shot speed,
distance and conditions), and if the swoop speed is right compared to the forward speed of the shot, then the
swooping motion will cancel CB deflection, and the CB will head in the desired initial cue direction. Also, as
shown in Diagram 2, a swoop stroke allows one to hit the CB closer to center to create a larger effective tip
offset. This might also be more comfortable for some people.

    The main disadvantage of a swoop stroke is that it can be difficult to control; and, in general, the shot
speed and amount of spin won’t be as consistent and accurate. It can also be difficult to apply near maximum
spin due to a greater risk of miscuing with less control. A straight stroke at the desired equivalent tip offset
position, with appropriate aim, will be much more accurate and consistent for most people. And as the
experiment showed, the swooping motion really provides no benefit in terms of spin generating capability.

    Whichever method you use, you will always need to adjust your aim for different shots to compensate for
the squirt, swerve, and throw that comes with using sidespin. For more information, see the english
(sidespin) resource page in the FAQ section at: billiards.colostate.edu.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV F.2 – Swoop Stroke Experiment - Can swooping create extra spin on the cue ball?
normal video

PS:
      •        For more information, and for results from additional testing, see the “chalk comparison resource
               page” in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-
author of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice
(VEPP),” “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD
series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      August, 2015
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/table_of_contents.pdf
title: Table of Contents
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
Table of Contents

           from the book:

The Illustrated Principles of
     Pool and Billiards

by David G. Alciatore, Phd (“Dr. Dave”)

        billiards.colostate.edu
                                                   Table of Contents

PREFACE ..................................................................................................................................................... 2
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS............................................................................................................................ 4
TABLE OF CONTENTS ............................................................................................................................. 5
LIST OF FIGURES...................................................................................................................................... 7
LIST OF PRINCIPLES ............................................................................................................................. 11
LIST OF HIGH-SPEED VIDEO CLIPS.................................................................................................. 13
LIST OF NORMAL VIDEO CLIPS ........................................................................................................ 15
LIST OF TECHNICAL PROOFS ............................................................................................................ 17
CHAPTER 1 - INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................... 18
    SECTION 1.01              PYRAMID OF PROGRESS ............................................................................................... 18
    SECTION 1.02              TERMINOLOGY ............................................................................................................. 20
    SECTION 1.03              8-BALL AND 9-BALL RULES .......................................................................................... 21
    SECTION 1.04              USING THE BOOK ......................................................................................................... 24
CHAPTER 2 - FUNDAMENTALS.......................................................................................................... 27
    SECTION 2.01              CUE STICK AND TIP ...................................................................................................... 27
    SECTION 2.02              GRIP ............................................................................................................................. 29
    SECTION 2.03              BRIDGE ........................................................................................................................ 31
    SECTION 2.04              STANCE ........................................................................................................................ 34
    SECTION 2.05              STROKE ........................................................................................................................ 36
CHAPTER 3 - EXECUTING BASIC SHOTS........................................................................................ 39
    SECTION 3.01              INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................ 39
    SECTION 3.02              AIMING METHODS ........................................................................................................ 40
    SECTION 3.03              CUE BALL PATH − THE 90° RULE .................................................................................. 46
    SECTION 3.04              CUE BALL PATH − THE 30° RULE .................................................................................. 53
    SECTION 3.05              BASIC SHOT PLANNING ................................................................................................ 60
    SECTION 3.06              EFFECTIVE POCKET SIZE AND CENTER .......................................................................... 63
    SECTION 3.07              SHOT MARGINS OF ERROR ............................................................................................ 39
CHAPTER 4 - SPIN AND ENGLISH ..................................................................................................... 79
    SECTION 4.01              INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................ 79
    SECTION 4.02              DRAW SHOT ................................................................................................................. 84
    SECTION 4.03              FOLLOW SHOT .............................................................................................................. 87
    SECTION 4.04              ENGLISH (SIDESPIN) ..................................................................................................... 91
    SECTION 4.05              CUT SHOT EFFECTS ...................................................................................................... 99
    SECTION 4.06              RAIL CUT SHOTS......................................................................................................... 102
    SECTION 4.07              CONTROLLING THE CUE BALL PATH ........................................................................... 106
    SECTION 4.08              ENGLISH EXAMPLES AND ADVICE .............................................................................. 111
CHAPTER 5 - POSITION PLAY AND STRATEGY.......................................................................... 114
    SECTION 5.01              INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................... 114
    SECTION 5.02              POSITION PLAY FUNDAMENTALS ................................................................................ 114
    SECTION 5.03              THE MAKE-ABLE ZONE ............................................................................................... 123
    SECTION 5.04              BALL GROUPINGS ....................................................................................................... 128

                                                                               5
    SECTION 5.05               BREAK-UP AND AVOIDANCE SHOTS ............................................................................ 131
    SECTION 5.06               SAFETIES AND DEFENSIVE PLAY ................................................................................. 136
CHAPTER 6 - BANK AND KICK SHOTS .......................................................................................... 150
    SECTION 6.01               INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................... 150
    SECTION 6.02               BANK SHOT AIMING METHODS ................................................................................... 152
    SECTION 6.03               KICK SHOT AIMING METHODS .................................................................................... 159
    SECTION 6.04               SPEED EFFECTS .......................................................................................................... 162
    SECTION 6.05               ENGLISH AND SIDESPIN EFFECTS ............................................................................... 169
    SECTION 6.06               CUT ANGLE EFFECTS .................................................................................................. 172
    SECTION 6.07               BANK AND KICK SHOT ADVICE ................................................................................... 174
CHAPTER 7 - ADVANCED TECHNIQUES (SHOT MAKING) ...................................................... 176
    SECTION 7.01               COMBINATION SHOTS................................................................................................. 176
    SECTION 7.02               CAROM SHOTS ........................................................................................................... 178
    SECTION 7.03               FROZEN BALL THROW SHOTS ..................................................................................... 181
    SECTION 7.04               USING THROW FOR POSITION...................................................................................... 185
    SECTION 7.05               POWER BREAK ........................................................................................................... 188
    SECTION 7.06               TWO-RAIL KICK AND BANK SHOTS ............................................................................. 194
    SECTION 7.07               FROZEN BALL BANK SHOTS ........................................................................................ 200
    SECTION 7.08               KICK SHOT VERTICAL PLANE SPIN .............................................................................. 201
    SECTION 7.09               MASSÉ SHOTS ............................................................................................................ 203
    SECTION 7.10               JUMP SHOTS ............................................................................................................... 206
    SECTION 7.11               THAT’S ALL FOLKS..................................................................................................... 211
BIBLIOGRAPHY .................................................................................................................................... 212
GLOSSARY .............................................................................................................................................. 214
INDEX ....................................................................................................................................................... 224

                                                                               6
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/technical_proof_index.html
title: Technical Proof (TP) - Dr. Dave Pool Info
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
Technical Proof (TP) - Dr. Dave Pool Info
Skip to content
Home
Answers to All Questions
Normal Video (NV)
High-Speed Video (HSV)
Technical Proof (TP)
Instructional Articles
Top 100 Tips, Tricks, Secrets, and Gems
Challenge Competitions
How to Use this Website
Videos
Normal Video (NV)
High-Speed Video (HSV)
Online Video Collection
Instructional Videos
Equipment Videos
Great Pool Matches
Great Pool Shots
Great Snooker Frames and Shots
Great 3-Cushion Runs and Shots
Miscellaneous Interesting Videos
Other Online Video Resources
Trick Shots
Dr. Dave YouTube videos
Dr. Dave Instructional DVDs
Dr. Dave Instructional Video Stream/Download
Resources
Answers to All Questions
Terminology Glossary
Instructor and Student Resources
Summaries and Handouts
Drills and Exercises
Examinations and Quizzes
Templates and Diagrams
Forms for Scoring and Rating
References
PBIA Instructor Resources
Pool Rules
Tutorial
Pool Rules
Pool Rules Quiz
Links
General Online Resources
Online Instructional Resources
Organizations and Leagues
Magazines
Recommended Pool Schools and Instructors
Online Retailers
Website with Links to This Site
Lists
Top 100 Tips, Tricks, Secrets, and Gems
Top 100 Pool Maxims, Sayings, and Quotes
Top 100 Pool Myths
Physics Resources
T-Shirts/Caps/Mugs/Posters
Instruction
Tutorial
Introduction to the Game
Fundamentals
Aiming
Throw
Cue Ball Control
Draw Shot
How to Use Sidespin
Strategy
Bank and Kick Shots
Break, Jump, Massé
Answers to All Questions
Instructor and Student Resources
Summaries and Handouts
Drills and Exercises
Examinations and Quizzes
Templates and Diagrams
Forms for Scoring and Rating
References
PBIA Instructor Resources
Pool Rules
Instructional Articles
Top 100 Tips, Tricks, Secrets, and Gems
Dr. Dave Instructional Products
Billiard University (BU) Boot Camps
Dr. Dave Pool School Private Lessons
Recommended Pool Schools and Instructors
Contact
Dr. Dave Alciatore
Dr-Dave on Facebook
DrDaveBilliards on YouTube
Dr. Dave E-mail Newsletter
Dr. Dave Pool School
BU Boot Camp
How to Use This Website
Toggle website search
Menu
Close
Home
Answers to All Questions
Normal Video (NV)
High-Speed Video (HSV)
Technical Proof (TP)
Instructional Articles
Top 100 Tips, Tricks, Secrets, and Gems
Challenge Competitions
How to Use this Website
Videos
Normal Video (NV)
High-Speed Video (HSV)
Online Video Collection
Instructional Videos
Equipment Videos
Great Pool Matches
Great Pool Shots
Great Snooker Frames and Shots
Great 3-Cushion Runs and Shots
Miscellaneous Interesting Videos
Other Online Video Resources
Trick Shots
Dr. Dave YouTube videos
Dr. Dave Instructional DVDs
Dr. Dave Instructional Video Stream/Download
Resources
Answers to All Questions
Terminology Glossary
Instructor and Student Resources
Summaries and Handouts
Drills and Exercises
Examinations and Quizzes
Templates and Diagrams
Forms for Scoring and Rating
References
PBIA Instructor Resources
Pool Rules
Tutorial
Pool Rules
Pool Rules Quiz
Links
General Online Resources
Online Instructional Resources
Organizations and Leagues
Magazines
Recommended Pool Schools and Instructors
Online Retailers
Website with Links to This Site
Lists
Top 100 Tips, Tricks, Secrets, and Gems
Top 100 Pool Maxims, Sayings, and Quotes
Top 100 Pool Myths
Physics Resources
T-Shirts/Caps/Mugs/Posters
Instruction
Tutorial
Introduction to the Game
Fundamentals
Aiming
Throw
Cue Ball Control
Draw Shot
How to Use Sidespin
Strategy
Bank and Kick Shots
Break, Jump, Massé
Answers to All Questions
Instructor and Student Resources
Summaries and Handouts
Drills and Exercises
Examinations and Quizzes
Templates and Diagrams
Forms for Scoring and Rating
References
PBIA Instructor Resources
Pool Rules
Instructional Articles
Top 100 Tips, Tricks, Secrets, and Gems
Dr. Dave Instructional Products
Billiard University (BU) Boot Camps
Dr. Dave Pool School Private Lessons
Recommended Pool Schools and Instructors
Contact
Dr. Dave Alciatore
Dr-Dave on Facebook
DrDaveBilliards on YouTube
Dr. Dave E-mail Newsletter
Dr. Dave Pool School
BU Boot Camp
How to Use This Website
Toggle website search
Technical Proof (TP)
Home|
Technical Proof (TP)
Physics background and mathematical formulas supporting many of the principles in The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards.
NOTE: This information will be of interest only to people with strong physics and mathematics backgrounds.
Proceed at your own risk.
Dr. Dave keeps this site commercial free, with no ads. If you appreciate the free resources, please consider making a one-time or monthly donation to show your support:
Show Your Support with a Donation
Chapter 2 – Fundamentals
TP 2.1 – Minimum cue tip friction required for no-slip horizontal impact
Chapter 3 – Executing Basic Shots
TP 3.1 – 90° rule
TP 3.2 – Ball speeds and distances after stun-shot impact
TP 3.3 – 30° rule
TP 3.4 – Margin of error based on distance and cut angle
TP 3.5 – Effective target sizes for slow shots into a side pocket at different angles
TP 3.6 – Effective target sizes for slow shots into a corner pocket at different angles
TP 3.7 – Effective target sizes for fast shots into a side pocket at different angles
TP 3.8 – Effective target sizes for fast shots into a corner pocket at different angles
TP 3.9 – Pocket target center offsets based on angle to the pocket (see TP 3.5 through TP 3.8)
TP 3.10 – Pocket margin of error regions for a slow shot (see TP 3.5 and TP 3.6)
TP 3.11 – Pocket margin of error regions for a fast shot (see TP 3.7 and TP 3.8)
TP 3.12 – Object ball angle error based on cut angle (see TP 3.4)
Chapter 4 – Spin and English
TP 4.1 – Distance required for stun and normal roll to develop
TP 4.2 – Center of percussion of the cue ball
TP 4.3 – Spin-induced throw effects
TP 4.4 – Relationship between the amount of throw and cut angle
Chapter 6 – Bank and Kick Shots
TP 6.1 – Parallel midpoint-line banking method geometry
TP 6.2 – Mirror-image kick-shot method geometry
TP 6.3 – Increase in bank rebound angle due to the rail coefficient of restitution
Chapter 7 – Advanced Techniques (Shot Making)
TP 7.1 – Two-rail parallel-line kick-shot geometry
TP 7.2 – Corner-5 three-rail diamond system formulas
TP 7.3 – Ball-rail interaction and the effects on vertical-plane spin
Additional proofs not referenced in the book:
TP A.1 – Half-ball hit, foot-spot carom shot
TP A.2 – Carom shot vs. cut shot example
TP A.3 – Minimum cue elevation required for a head-spot-to-foot-spot center-ball-hit shot
TP A.4 – Post-impact cue ball trajectory for any cut angle, speed, and spin
TP A.5 – The effects of ball inelasticity and friction on the 90° rule
TP A.6 – The effects of ball inelasticity and friction on the 30° rule
TP A.7 – The effects of sidespin on the 90° rule
TP A.8 – The effects of sidespin on the 30° rule
TP A.9 – Cue accelerometer measurements
TP A.10 – The effect of bridge length on contact point accuracy
TP A.11 – Analysis of a common fractional-ball aiming system
TP A.12 – The relationship between cue ball spin and cue tip offset
TP A.13 – Number of lines of aim required for different types of shots
TP A.14 – The effects of cut angle, speed, and spin on object ball throw
TP A.15 – Controlling the cue ball direction in a frozen cue-ball shot
TP A.16 – Final ball speeds, distances, and directions for natural roll shots
TP A.17 – The effect of the amount of friction on throw
TP A.18 – Distance required for stun and natural roll to develop for different tip offsets
TP A.19 – Massé shot aiming method, and curved cue ball paths
TP A.20 – The effect of spin, speed, and cut angle on draw shots
TP A.21 – Comparison of bisector-point and double-angle-bisect draw systems
TP A.22 – “Tips” of english
TP A.23 – Ball-hit fraction vs. cut angle
TP A.24 – The effects of follow and draw on throw, and OB swerve
TP A.25 – The relationship between spin-rate-factor and percent-english
TP A.26 – The amount of sidespin required for “gearing” outside english
TP A.27 – Spin transfer
TP A.28 – Throw plots for all types of shots
TP A.29 – Using throw to limit cue ball motion
TP A.30 – The effects of cue tip offset, cue weight, and cue speed on cue ball speed and spin
TP A.31 – The physics of squirt
TP B.1 – Squirt angle, pivot length, and tip size
TP B.2 – Rolling resistance, spin resistance, and “ball turn”
TP B.3 – Throw calibration and contour plots for various cut angles, speeds, English, and roll
TP B.4 – Stroke speed and acceleration vs. distance
TP B.5 – Rolling CB, direct-hit hop and ball travel distances
TP B.6 – Cue ball table lengths of travel for different speeds, accounting for rail rebound and drag losses
TP B.7 – Effect of squirt on the amount of spin
TP B.8 – Draw shot physics
TP B.9 – Draw shot spin vs. spin ratio
TP B.10 – Draw shot cue elevation effects
TP B.11 – Shallow-angle contact-point mirror kick system
TP B.12 – Optimal tip height for speed/distance control
TP B.13 – Rolling cue ball carom angle approximations
TP B.14 – Draw shot cue ball angle approximations
TP B.15 – Pocket geometry calculations
TP B.16 – CB-OB distance for follow cling
TP B.17 – Maximum Drag-Enhanced Sidespin Tip Contact Point
TP B.18 – Pendulum Stroke Cue Tip Trajectory
TP B.19 – Comparison of cue ball deflection (squirt) “endmass” and stiffness effects
TP B.20 – Peak forces and tip contact distance during a break shot
TP B.21 – Small-gap-combination throw effects
TP B.22 – How peak tip contact force and contact patch size vary with shot speed, and drop tests
TP B.23 – Cue Pivot Point Required for Known CB Carom Angle
TP B.24 – Estimating Rolling CB Carom Angle with 1/4 Cue Point
TP B.25 – Percentage Outside Spin Required for Maximum SIT at Any Cut Angle
TP B.26 – BHE/FHE Pivot Percentage Relation to Cue Natural Pivot Length
TP B.27 – Sliding Bank System Comparison
TP B.28 – Sliding-Bank-Shot Table Comparisons From Careful Measurements
TP B.29 – Simulation of a CB striking two frozen OBs along their line of centers
TP B.30 – Outside vs. Inside Spin Margins for Error
TP B.31 – Percentage Inside Spin Required for Maximum CIT at Any Cut Angle
See also:
High-speed pool and billiards video clips
Normal-speed pool and billiards video clips
Instructional articles
Dr. Dave keeps this site commercial free, with no ads. If you appreciate the free resources, please consider making a one-time or monthly donation to show your support:
Show Your Support with a Donation
Instructional Products | T-Shirts/Caps/Mugs | Private Lessons | BU Courses | Contact | Privacy Policy | Subscribe to E-mail List and YouTube Channel | Show Your Support and Donate
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/the_30_degree_rule_part_i_the_basics.pdf
title: The 30° rule Part I - The Basics
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                                       ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
The 30° rule
Part I – The Basics

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV 3.8) help you locate the resources on the
website.

     If you don’t know the 30º rule yet, learning it can truly transform your game. Like the 90º rule,
presented in my previous series of three articles, the 30º rule helps you predict the path of the
cue ball after impact with an object ball. This is a very important skill to have for helping you
prevent scratches, plan break-up and avoidance shots, and execute carom and billiards shots. It
is also critical in being able to play position (the skill that separates the great players from the
good ones). It always surprises me how few people know this rule. Also, it is shocking to me that
few books on pool and billiards give adequate (or any) coverage of this principle.

     As shown in my previous three articles, the tangent line and the 90° rule are useful for
predicting the path of the cue ball when it strikes an object ball with no topspin or bottom spin
(i.e., for stun shots). However, with many shots the cue ball is rolling (with topspin) by the time it
strikes the object ball. So for many shots, the angle between the cue ball and the object ball will
be less than 90°. A useful rule for predicting the path of the cue ball when it is rolling is the 30°
rule presented in Principle 2 and Diagram 1. It states that if the cue ball hits approximately half
of the object ball (see Diagram 2), the cue ball will deflect off at very close to 30° from its original
path. Note that, unlike with the 90° rule, the 30° angle is measured between the original cue ball
path and the deflected cue ball path. The deflected object ball direction is not involved. With the
90° rule, the angle is measured between the deflected cue ball and object ball paths. An exact
half-ball hit, where the center of cue ball is aimed at the edge of the object ball, is illustrated in
Diagram 2.
Principle 2 30° rule

When the cue ball hits an object ball with normal roll close to a half-ball hit (see Diagram
2), the cue ball will deflect approximately 30° away from its initial aiming line (see Diagram
1).

•   The 30° rule applies only when the cue ball is rolling without skidding at object ball impact.
    Diagram 6 shows the type of shots where the 30° rule applies.
•   The 30° rule is useful for planning carom and billiard shots (examples will be shown in a
    future article).
•   There is a fairly large margin of error (see Diagram 3). In other words, for a fairly large range
    of ball-hit fractions (see Diagram 4), the cue ball path will still deflect by approximately 30°.
•   The largest cue ball deflection (about 34°) occurs for an exact half-ball hit (see Diagram 3).
•   The 90° rule (see my previous three articles) serves as another point of reference when
    shooting shots in between stun and normal roll.
•   As with the 90° rule, the exact path of the cue ball depends on the speed of the shot (this will
    be discussed in detail in a future article).

                                                     the cue ball’s path
                                     fast            is deflected by 30°
                                    medium
                                    slow

                                                                    30° deflected angle

                                                                              aiming
                                                                                line

                                            Diagram 1 30° rule

                                                                  half-ball
                                                                     hit

                                      Diagram 2 Half-ball hit

     You might be asking yourself: How often am I going to be shooting half-ball hits, and is the
30° rule so useful after all?” Fortunately, as illustrated in Diagram 3, the 30° rule applies over a
wide range of ball-hit fractions (see TP 3.3). The center of the range is the half-ball hit, but the
cue ball deflection is very close to 30° for ball-hit fractions as small as 1/4 and as large as 3/4.
Diagram 4 illustrates the ball-hit-fraction range, and corresponding cut angles, to illustrate the
wide range of shots for which the 30° rule applies. With a 1/4-ball hit (see Diagram 4a), the
center of the cue ball is aimed outside of the object-ball edge such that the projected cue-ball-
path passes through 1/4 of the object ball. With a 1/2-ball hit (see Diagram 4b), the center of the
cue ball is aimed directly at the edge of the object ball such that the projected cue-ball-path
passes through 1/2 of the object ball. With a 3/4-ball hit (see Diagram 4c), the center of the cue
ball is aimed inside of the object-ball edge such that the projected cue-ball-path passes through
3/4 of the object ball. These three cases cover a fairly large range of cut angles.
                                                 40º

                     cue ball deflection angle
                                                 30º

                                                 20º                      wide margin of error

                                                 10º
                                                                              half-ball hit

                                                                    1/4           1/2                3/4      1

                                                                            ball-hit fraction

                                                  Diagram 3 Large margin of error for 30° rule

                  TP 3.3 – 30° rule
technical proof

                                                                              the cue ball path is deflected by
                                                                              approximately 30º in each case

                                                                            medium                           small
                            large                                          cut angle                       cut angle
                          cut angle
                                                             ~30º                             ~30º                       ~30º

                                                  1/4                                      1/2               3/4

         top view:

      side view:
  (looking along the
     aiming line)
                                                       1/4                           1/2                           3/4
                                                 a) 1/4-ball hit               b) 1/2-ball hit               c) 3/4-ball hit

                                                        Diagram 4 Various ball-hit fractions
     When using follow and draw, it is important to understand how the spin changes as the cue
ball slides on the table cloth. The spin associated with follow and draw shots degrades as the
cue ball travels. The harder you hit the shot the longer the spin will persist, but most soft to
medium shots eventually end up with pure normal roll, where there is no longer any over-rotation
or sliding between the cue ball and the cloth (see TP 4.1). Diagram 5 illustrates how the vertical
spin from stun, draw, and follow shots eventually transforms into normal roll (see Principle 3).
With a center ball hit (Diagram 5a) the cue ball is initially sliding without rolling, but the sliding on
the cloth gradually builds up topspin to the point of normal roll. The increasing topspin is
illustrated in the diagram by the lengthening of the curved arrows. The speed of the cue ball
slows as the cue ball slides. This is illustrated in the diagram by the shortening of the straight
arrows. Once the cue ball reaches normal roll, the roll persists until the ball slows to a stop. With
a draw shot (Diagram 5b) it takes a little longer for roll to develop; but eventually, all of the
bottom spin is lost (see HSV 3.1), creating stun, which then degrades to normal roll. With a follow
shot (Diagram 5c) the topspin degrades to normal roll; however, unlike with stun and draw, the
speed actually increases because the topspin is turning and sliding in the direction to create the
normal roll. The draw shot takes the longest to reach normal roll because its spin first degrades
to stun and then to roll.

                                     stun               increasing            normal
                                   (no spin)              topspin               roll
                                                                                                  table
                                                                                                 surface

                                               a) stun shot

                                    draw               decreasing              stun
                                (bottom spin)          bottom spin           (no spin)

                                              b) draw shot

                                    follow             decreasing            normal
                                  (topspin)              topspin               roll

                                              c) follow shot

    Diagram 5 Conversion of vertical-plane spin to normal roll (side view)
Principle 3 Normal roll

The cue ball gradually develops normal roll as it slides along the table cloth (see Diagram
5).

•     This is true regardless of what type of vertical spin the ball has (draw, follow, or stun).
•     Normal roll gives a ball the effects of a follow shot.

                        HSV 3.1 – Stop shot showing loss of bottom spin over distance
high-speed video

                        TP 4.1 – Time and distance required to develop normal roll
technical proof

    Diagram 6 illustrates some of the cases where the 30° rule applies. Remember, it applies
only when the cue ball has developed complete forward roll by the time it reaches the object ball,
and when the ball-hit fraction is in the approximate range 1/4 to 3/4. For shot “A” in Diagram 6
(the top-left shot), the cue ball is close to the object ball, so follow (topspin) is required because
the cue ball does not have enough distance and time to develop complete forward roll on its own.
For shot “B” (the top-right shot), follow (topspin) is again required because the faster speed does
not give the cue ball enough time to develop complete roll. In shot “C” (the bottom-left shot),
because the cue ball is hit with slow speed, the cue ball will develop forward roll regardless of the
English (except extreme draw). In shot “D” (the bottom-right shot), the large cue-ball distance
provides enough time for roll to develop for most speeds and English (except fast draw shots).

       A: cue ball at a short distance                 B: cue ball hit hard at a medium distance

                              30°
                                 any speed

                                                                             fast
                                                                             medium
                                                                             slow        30°
                        any English
                                      fast
                          (except
                  30°    extreme      medium

                           draw)      slow
                                                          slow or medium
                                                          speed with any
                                                          English, or fast                          30°
                                                             with follow

       C: cue ball hit soft at a medium distance            D: cue ball hit at a large distance

                            Diagram 6 Types of shots where the 30° rule applies

    To be able to apply the 30° rule effectively, you need to be able to visualize a 30° angle.
Diagram 7 shows how to use you hand to help with this. For most people, if you form a relaxed
but firm V-shape (peace sign or victory symbol) with your index and middle fingers, the angle
between your fingers will be very close to 30°. Diagram 7, NV 3.8, and NV 3.9 show how this
hand V-shape is used in practice. If you point one of the fingers in the aiming line direction, the
other finger will indicate the direction the cue ball will travel after impact.

                                                                              deflected
                 original                                                      cue ball
               (incoming)                                                       path
                 cue ball
                   path

                                        30º

                Diagram 7 Using your hand to visualize the 30° rule cue ball paths

                  NV 3.8 – Using your hand to visualize the 30° rule
normal video

    When first trying to develop an intuition for the 30° angle, it might be helpful to use a
30°/60°/90° drafting triangle which you can purchase at an art supply store (see Diagram 8) or a
template you can cut out of paper (refer to Diagram 9 for the proper proportions). Before
shooting a shot, lay the triangle or template down on the table to help you learn to visualize the
30° angle, as shown in Diagram 8 and NV 3.9. Diagram 10 shows the example from NV 3.9
graphically. The point of the triangle should be placed at the center of the imaginary ghost-ball
target and one edge should be aligned with the original cue-ball path (i.e., the aiming line). The
remaining edge then shows the direction of the deflected cue-ball path.
deflected
 cue ball
  path

                                                  center of the
 original                                          imaginary
 cue ball                                          ghost ball
  path                                               target

            a) aiming line (cue ball path) view                      b) impact line (target) view

        Diagram 8 Using a drafting triangle to visualize the 30° rule cue ball paths

                                                      0.6
                                   30°

                                   1
                                                 proportions for making
                                                  your own 30° triangle
                                             (e.g., by cutting it out of paper)

                               Diagram 9 30° angle proportions
                                     original
                                  cue ball path
                                  (aiming line)

                    deflected
                                              30°
                  cue ball path

                                                                             fast
                                                                             medium
                                                                             slow

                                  center of the imaginary
                                     ghost ball target

                       Diagram 10 Example shot illustrating the 30° rule

                NV 3.9 – 30° rule example
normal video

     As with the 90° rule, the 30° rule is very useful for helping you prevent scratches, break up
ball clusters, avoid obstacle balls, and execute carom and billiard shots. Examples of these types
of shots will be presented in my next two articles. Hopefully, after this series of articles, you will
appreciate the importance of the 30° rule and be able to use it in your game. As was shown in
Diagrams 3, 4, and 6, the 30° rule applies for a wide variety of shots, and you will have many
opportunities to use it to your advantage.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/the_30_degree_rule_part_ii_examples.pdf
title: The 30° rule: Part II - Examples
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                                        ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
The 30° rule:
Part II – Examples

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at www.engr.colostate.edu/pool.
The reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV 3.8) help you locate the resources on
the website.

     As I pointed out in last month’s article, if you don’t know the 30º rule yet, learning it can truly
transform your game. Like the 90º rule presented in my previous series of three articles, the 30º
rule helps you predict the path of the cue ball after impact with an object ball. You may recall that
the 90° rule applies only for stun shots, where the cue ball strikes an object ball with no topspin or
bottom spin. However, with many shots the cue ball is rolling (with topspin) by the time it strikes
the object ball. This is where the 30° rule comes in handy. Last month’s article (April, 2004)
introduced the rule, when it applies, and how it is used in practice. The purpose of this article is
to show some real examples of how you can use the rule in your game to prevent scratches, plan
break-up or avoidance shots, and execute carom or billiards shots.

    The key points of the 30º rule are summarized in Principle 2 and illustrated in Diagram 1.
The rule states that if the cue ball hits approximately half of the object ball (see Diagram 2), the
cue ball will deflect off at very close to 30° from its original path. An exact half-ball hit, where the
center of cue ball is aimed at the edge of the object ball, is illustrated in Diagram 2.

Principle 2 30° rule

When the cue ball hits an object ball with normal roll close to a half-ball hit (see Diagram
2), the cue ball will deflect approximately 30° away from its initial aiming line (see Diagram
1, NV 3.8, and NV 3.9).

•   The 30° rule applies only when the cue ball is rolling without skidding at object ball impact.
•   There is a fairly large margin of error. In other words, for a fairly large range of ball-hit
    fractions (i.e., cut angles), the cue ball path will still deflect by approximately 30° (see TP 3.3).

                                                      the cue ball’s path
                                      fast            is deflected by 30°
                                      medium
                                      slow

                                                                     30° deflected angle

                                                                            aiming
                                                                              line

                                             Diagram 1 30° rule
                                                                 half-ball
                                                                    hit

                                       Diagram 2 Half-ball hit

                  TP 3.3 – 30° rule
technical proof

                  NV 3.8 – Using your hand to visualize the 30° rule
normal video
                  NV 3.9 – 30° rule example

     Diagram 3 and NV 3.10 show how the 30° rule can be used to prevent a scratch. The goal
of the shot is to pocket the 1-ball in the top corner pocket without scratching in the bottom corner
pocket. If the 1-ball is pocketed with a slow stroke, so the cue ball is rolling when it contacts the
object ball, the shot will definitely result in a scratch. This is because the cue-ball path gets
deflected by 30° after impact, sending it straight to the pocket. If the shot is hit with more speed
or with a partial stun stroke, the cue ball can be directed along path A or B instead, which avoids
the scratch. The effects of speed and spin on cue-ball paths will be presented in detail in a future
article.

                                                                               expected
                                       1                                      30° rule path
                                               30°

                          tangent                     A    scratch
                            line                  B
                                                                                 paths for
                                                                              higher speeds
                                                                              and/or less roll

                  Diagram 3 Using the 30° rule to check for and prevent a scratch

                  NV 3.10 – Using the 30° rule to check for and prevent a scratch
normal video
     With a break-up shot, the goal is to purposely drive the cue ball into object balls (e.g., to
break up a problem cluster). With avoidance shots, the goal is to purposely avoid hitting certain
balls. In the game of 8-ball, the balls you want to avoid could be your own (“stripes” or “solids”) if
they already happen to be in good places (e.g., close to a pocket, or blocking shots for you
opponent). The balls to avoid could also be your opponent’s balls if they happen to be in a bad
place for your opponent (e.g., tied up in a cluster). Also, sometimes you just want to avoid hitting
balls so the cue ball can end up in good position for your next shot. Diagram 4 shows a table
layout where an avoidance shot is appropriate, assuming you are shooting “solids.” The two
“stripes” are tied up and you would like to leave them that way so if you do not run the table your
opponent will be faced with a difficult shot. You also need to avoid the “stripes” to reliably control
the position of the cue ball.

                                                           3

                                    2

                                  opponent cluster
                                   to be avoided

                                                                       8

                                                       1
                                 shooting
                                  solids

                 Diagram 4 Example table layout requiring an avoidance shot

     Diagram 5 shows how the 30° rule can be used to plan the path of the cue ball, assuming the
1-ball will be pocketed first. Note that the 90° rule would predict that the cue ball would deflect
directly into the tied up “stripes” in the tangent-line direction. But remember, the 90° rule only
applies exactly in the case of a stun stroke. In this shot, the cue ball will be rolling when it hits the
1-ball. The roll is ensured by the use of a slight follow stroke. After hitting the 1-ball, the cue
ball’s path is deflected approximately 30°, resulting in good position for the 2-ball after rebound
off the end rail. Diagram 6 shows how the remainder of the table can be run easily, resulting in
victory.
                                                                       90°
                                                                     tangent
                                                                       line

                                                    3

                              2

                            fast
                            medium
                            slow

                                                               8
                                                                         30°

                                                1

                                                                           cue ball path
                                                                           avoiding the
                                                                         opponent’s cluster

                   Diagram 5 Using the 30° rule to plan an avoidance shot

                                                        3

                                     2

                                                                     8

                     Diagram 6 Running the table after an avoidance shot

     Both the 90° rule and the 30° rule can be used to plan carom shots, where you deflect one
ball (cue ball or object ball) of another to make a shot. These shots can be difficult, but if you can
accurately predict the angle at which a deflected ball will travel, a carom shot can be a useful
weapon in your arsenal. Diagram 7 shows a good example from a 9-ball game, where a cue ball
carom shot off the 1-ball can result in a victory. Remember, the 30° rule predicts that the cue ball
path deflects from its original path approximately 30° over a fairly wide range of cut angles. That
means that the shot in Diagram 7 is easy to make (i.e., there is a wide margin of error) as long as
you are careful with speed. In this example, the cue ball is hit a little above center to make sure
the cue ball is rolling when it hits the 1-ball; otherwise, the 30° rule does not apply. Also, the shot
is hit fairly slowly so the cue ball deflects immediately after impact with the 1-ball (see NV 7.4). If
the shot were hit harder, the cue ball would deflect along the 1-ball tangent-line first before
turning to the 30° direction (see Diagram 3), possibly resulting in a missed shot.

                                                                   4             9
                                   the cue ball
                                   path deflects
                                                               3
                                      by 30°

                                                                           30°
                                                           1
                          fast
                          medium                                       2
                          slow
                                          the cue ball
                                           is rolling at
                                              impact

                           Diagram 7 30° rule cue-ball carom example

                NV 7.4 – 30° rule cue-ball carom shot
normal video

     In Diagram 7, because the 9-ball is a “duck” in the mouth of the pocket, the carom shot is an
obvious choice because it results in victory. However, even if some other ball was in the 9-ball’s
place, the carom shot would still be more attractive than the difficult 1-ball-2-ball combination.
This is because the margin of error for a 30º rule carom shot is so much larger than the small
margin of error for a combination shot. Furthermore, even if the 2-ball was not blocking the path
of the 1-ball to the corner pocket, the carom shot might still be preferable (easier to execute) than
the 1-ball cut-shot in the bottom corner pocket. Again, this is because the margin of error for a
30º rule carom shot is still larger than the small margin of error for a large cut angle cut shot. In
next month’s article, I will look at this issue in more detail and provide a very dramatic example
illustrating how important and useful the 30º rule can be.

     It always surprises me how few people know the 30º rule and how to apply it. Also, it is
shocking to me that most pool and billiards books give little (if any) coverage of this extremely
important and useful principle. I hope this series of articles will help you incorporate these ideas
into your game.

Have fun and practice hard,
Dr. Dave
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/the_30_degree_rule_part_iii_carom_vs_cut.pdf
title: The 30° rule: Part III - Carom vs. Cut
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
The 30° rule:
Part III – Carom vs. Cut

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article (e.g., NV 3.8) help you locate the resources on the
website. If you don’t have access to the Internet, or if you have a slow connection (e.g., a
modem), you may want to view the online resources from a CD-ROM. To order one,
send a check or money order (payable to David Alciatore) for $21.45 to Pool Book CD;
626 S. Meldrum St.; Fort Collins, CO 80521. The CD-ROM is compatible with both PCs
and MACs.

      As I pointed out in my last two articles, if you don’t know the 30º rule yet, learning it can truly
transform your game. Like the 90º rule presented in my previous series of three articles, the 30º
rule helps you predict the path of the cue ball after impact with an object ball. You might recall
that the 90° rule applies only for stun shots, where the cue ball strikes an object ball with no
topspin or bottom spin. However, with many shots the cue ball is rolling (with topspin) by the time
it strikes the object ball. This is where the 30° rule comes in handy.

    My article two months ago (April, 2004) introduced the 30º rule, when it applies, and how it is
used in practice. My previous article (May, 2004) showed some real examples of how you can
use the rule in your game to prevent scratches, plan break-up or avoidance shots, and execute
carom or billiards shots. In this article, I discuss how the 30º rule can be used to help you choose
between a carom shot and a cut shot for a very interesting example.

    The key points of the 30º rule are summarized in Principle 2 and illustrated in Diagram 1.
The rule states that if the cue ball hits approximately half of the object ball (see Diagram 2), the
cue ball will deflect off at very close to 30° from its original path. An exact half-ball hit, where the
center of cue ball is aimed at the edge of the object ball, is illustrated in Diagram 2.
Principle 2 30° rule

When the cue ball hits an object ball with normal roll close to a half-ball hit (see Diagram
2), the cue ball will deflect approximately 30° away from its initial aiming line (see Diagram
1, NV 3.8, and NV 3.9).

•     The 30° rule applies only when the cue ball is rolling without skidding at object ball impact.
•     There is a fairly large margin of error. In other words, for a fairly large range of ball-hit
      fractions (i.e., cut angles), the cue ball path will still deflect by approximately 30° (see TP 3.3).

                                                        the cue ball’s path
                                        fast            is deflected by 30°
                                        medium
                                        slow

                                                                       30° deflected angle

                                                                                 aiming
                                                                                   line

                                               Diagram 1 30° rule

                                                                     half-ball
                                                                        hit

                                         Diagram 2 Half-ball hit

                  TP 3.3 – 30° rule
technical proof

                  NV 3.8 – Using your hand to visualize the 30° rule
normal video
                  NV 3.9 – 30° rule example

     Diagram 3 shows the table layout I want to consider in this article. The 1-ball is on the foot
spot, the 9-ball is in the jaws of the top-right corner pocket, and the cue ball is on the head string
to the right of the head spot. There are many different shot options in this situation, but the two I
want to consider are the cut shot illustrated in Diagram 4 and the carom shot illustrated in
Diagram 5. Another reasonable shot attempt would be a 1-ball-9-ball combination, but I will not
be considering that alternative here. You may be saying to yourself: “The table layout in Diagram
3 is not going to come up very often.” That may be true, but similar situations may present
themselves where a carom shot might be an option to consider as an alternative to a cut shot.
Also, as you will see by the end of the article, you might want to use this shot as a challenge to
friends or naive bystanders that are careless with their money. The challenge would be: “I bet I
can make more carom shots in a row than you can make cut shots” (per Diagrams 4 and 5). It
turns out that the carom shot is much easier to execute than the cut shot ... by far!
                                                                                         9

                                     the cue ball                 the 9-ball is
                                   is to the right of              in the jaws
                     fast
                                    the head spot                of the pocket
                     medium       on the head string
                     slow

                                                                        1

                                                    the 1-ball
                                                     is on the
                                                    foot spot

                                Diagram 3 Example table layout

                                                                                         9

                     fast
                     medium
                     slow

                                                                        1

                                                                        1-ball
                                                                       cut shot

                                       Diagram 4 Cut shot

    Diagram 5 illustrates the carom shot and why it is so easy to execute. The required angular
deflection of the cue ball path happens to be exactly 30º. Because of this, there is an extremely
large margin of error for the shot, as illustrated in Diagram 6 (see TP 3.3). You can hit as little as
1/4 of the 1-ball and as much as 3/4 of the 1-ball and still have the deflected cue ball path be very
close to 30º, and make the shot.
                                                                                                               9

                                                                                   carom (kiss) shot
                                                                                   off the 1-ball into
                                           fast                                         the 9-ball
                                           medium
                                           slow                                                          30°
                                                                                                 1

                                                            Diagram 5 Carom shot

                                             40º
               cue ball deflection angle

                                             30º

                                             20º                    wide margin of error

                                             10º
                                                                        half-ball hit

                                                              1/4           1/2            3/4            1

                                                                      ball-hit fraction

                                                   Diagram 6 Carom shot wide margin of error

     You may be asking yourself: “How much easier is the carom shot vs. the cut shot?” Well,
being the nerdy engineer that I am, I had to answer this question with a detailed and thorough
mathematical analysis (see TP A.2). It turns out that the carom shot is about 10-times easier to
make than the cut shot! It’s not just 10% or 20% easier; it is about 900% easier!!! The allowable
cue-ball angle error (i.e., the margin of error) for the carom shot is about 1.5º (see TP A.2). This
is fairly easy to achieve for even amateurs. The margin of error for the cut shot (see TP 3.4) is
only about 0.15º. Even a pro would not be totally confident in staying within that margin
consistently. Actually, the carom shot is even easier than these numbers imply, because my
analysis (TP A.2) only considers geometry. Another advantage of the carom shot is that it is very
easy to visualize the aiming line because you are aiming for a half-ball hit (see Diagram 2). With
a half-ball hit, you aim directly at the edge of the 1-ball (which is very easy to see). For the cut
shot, you must visualize the ghost ball target necessary to create the required cut angle (see NV
3.1). If you watch NV A.1, where I attempt the cut shot and carom shot 5 times each, you will see
that I am extremely careful with the cut shot attempts, making sure all of my fundamentals are
solid and my concentration level is high. I make 4 out of 5, which is fairly good, but I would not
have total confidence in making the shot if I had to face it in a critical point of an important game.
For the carom shot attempts in the video, I am almost careless, not even really aiming, but I still
make 5 out of 5. If I were to give the carom shot the same care as the cut shot, I am confident
that I would never miss it. In fact, I would bet anybody in the world any amount of money that I
could make more carom shots in a row than they could make cut shots (per Diagrams 4 and 5).
This is a great example where a little knowledge of the game can give you a huge advantage. In
general, carom shots can be much easier to execute than other more obvious options (see
Principle 4). I encourage you to try the experiment I demonstrate in NV A.1. I’m sure you will
see similar results with the carom shot.

                  TP 3.4 - Margin of error based on distance
technical proof

Principle 4 A carom shot is sometimes better than a combo or tough cut

When available, a carom shot with normal roll is usually a better option than a difficult
combination shot or an extreme cut shot.

•     The margin of error for a rolling carom shot is fairly large (see Diagram 6), provided the
      speed is slow.
•     Combination shots can be much more difficult than they seem (as will be presented in a
      future article).
•     The margin of error for a large cut-angle cut-shot can be extremely small (see TP 3.4).

     Most shots and aiming methods (e.g., for planning bank and kick shots) work on any size
table (i.e., you don’t need to modify the methods based on the size of the table). The carom shot
in Diagram 5 is an exception. For different size tables, the relative size of the balls compared to
the table changes because the balls are the same size on all tables. This relative size difference
changes the angles on the carom shot. To adjust for table size, you must shift the initial cue ball
placement (see TP A.1). For a 6.5’ table, you should place the cue ball about one ball to the right
of the head spot. For an 8’ table, the offset should be about 2-3 balls. And for a 9’ table, the
offset should be about 3-4 balls. In NV A.1, the cue ball offset used on the 8’ table was only
about 1 ball. An offset of 2-3 balls (on an 8’ table) would increase the margin of error even more.

                  NV A.1 - Cut shot vs. carom shot example
normal video
                  NV 3.1 - Practicing contact point and ghost ball visualization

                  TP 3.3 – 30° rule
                  TP A.1 - Half-ball hit, foot-spot carom shot
technical proof
                  TP A.2 - Carom shot vs. cut shot example

     I hope, by now, you appreciate the potential power of the 30º rule. The example presented in
this article is a good illustration of how useful it can be. Also, the 30º rule is an essential tool in
position play, where it is important to know where the cue ball will go after impact with an object
ball. The 30º rule applies for most pool shots, where the cue ball is rolling at object ball impact
and where the cut angle is in a reasonable range (with a ball-hit fraction between 1/4 and 3/4)
(see TP 3.3 and Diagram 6). It always surprises me how few people know the 30º rule and how
to apply it. Also, it is shocking to me that most pool and billiards books give little (if any) coverage
of this extremely important principle. I hope this series of articles will help you incorporate this
useful principle into your game.

Have fun and practice hard,
Dr. Dave

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
His book, “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards,” is coming out this August.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/the_90_degree_rule_part_i_the_basics.pdf
title: The 90° rule Part I - the basics
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                                  ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES

                                         The 90° rule                                                Part I – the basics
Note: Narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and
viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article correspond to the numbers used on
the website.

     A very important skill for                                                              a center ball hit (or slightly
aiming and planning shots is                                                                 below center) at almost any
the ability to predict where the                                                             speed (except very slow) is
cue ball will go after impact                                                    90°         acceptable because the cue ball
with an object ball. Diagram                           (a) small cut                         will not have time or distance to
1 and Principle 1 summarize                                                                  develop forward roll (topspin).
one of the most important                                                          impact         For the shot in the top-right
principles of pool related to                                                        line    of Diagram 2, the cue ball is a
this – the 90° rule. It states                                                               medium distance from the
that when the cue ball strikes                                                   90°         object ball. In this case, faster
an object ball with no topspin                                                               speed is used to ensure that the
                                                     (b) medium cut
or bottom spin, the two balls                                                        tangent cue ball does not develop
will always separate at 90°. In                                                         line forward roll. For the shot in the
other words, the tangent line                                                                bottom-left of the diagram, the
will be perpendicular to the                                                     90°         cue ball distance is the same as
impact line (see Diagram 1b).                                                                with the top-right shot; but in
This is true regardless of the                                                               this case, draw (bottom spin) is
                                                       (c) large cut                         used instead of speed to
cut angle (see Diagram 1 and
NV 3.4).                                                                                     counteract the effects of forward
     The 90°                                                                                                     roll.      The
                                 NV 3.4 90° rule with various entering angles
rule applies                                                                                                     bottom spin
                                 NV 3.5 Using your hand to visualize the 90° rule impact and tangent lines
exactly only                                                                                                     wears off by
                                 NV 3.6 Stop shot
for a stun         normal video
                                 NV 3.7 Using the 90° rule to check for and prevent a scratch                    the time the
shot, where                                                                                                      cue        ball
the cue ball is                                                                                              reaches         the
sliding without                                                                                              object         ball
topspin        or                                                                                            resulting in stun.
                                  90°       any speed                                                        For the shot in
bottom spin at
impact with the                         (except very slow)                                                   the bottom-right
object       ball.                                                                                           of the diagram,
                                                                                                  90°
Diagram         2                                                                     fast                   the cue ball is a
illustrates some                                                                      medium                 large     distance
                                                                                      slow
of the cases                                                                                                 from the object
where the 90°                                                                                                ball, and both
rule     applies.                             fast                                                           speed and draw
For the shot in                               medium                                                         are required to
                                              slow
the top-left of              90°                                          fast                    90°        offset          the
the     diagram,                                                          medium                             forward roll that
the cue ball is
                                                                          slow
                                                                                                             would normally
close to the                                                                                                 develop over the
object ball to                                                                                               larger distance.
begin with, so
   Principle 1 90° rule

   With a stun shot where there is no topspin or bottom spin, after impact the cue ball will depart along the tangent line
   which is perpendicular (at a right angle) to the impact line. In other words the cue ball and object ball paths, after impact,
   will be 90° apart (see Diagram 1 and TP 1).

   •      The cue ball path will exactly coincide with the tangent line only when the cue ball hits the object ball with no topspin
          (follow or normal roll) or bottom spin (draw). Diagram 2 shows the type of shots where the 90° rule applies.
   •      Topspin results in angles less than 90°, bottom spin results in angles more than 90° (see Diagram 4).
   •      Sidespin English has practically no effect.
   •      Even when the cue ball has top or bottom spin, it will still leave initially along the tangent line before curving due to the
          spin (see Diagram 4). The faster the shot, the longer the cue ball persists along the tangent line.
   •      If the cue ball is rolling naturally, a more useful rule is the 30° rule (to be presented in a future article).

                                                                           HSV 3.1 Stop shot showing loss of bottom spin over distance
                   TP 3.1 90° rule derivation           high-speed video
technical proof
                                                                           HSV 3.2 Stop shot to prevent a scratch

        Diagram 3 shows a photograph                 completely (i.e., it gets stunned into    contacts the object ball, the 90° rule
   of a hand shape that can be useful to          place), transferring all of its speed to     predicts that the shot will definitely
   help you visualize the 90° angle and           the object ball. This is called a stop       result in a scratch. To prevent the
   the tangent line direction. The index          shot (see NV 3.6, HSV 3.1, and HSV           scratch, you need to make sure the cue
   finger points in the direction of the          3.2).                                        ball does not hit the object ball with
   target, along the required impact line,             The 90° rule is very useful for         stun. If draw is used, the cue ball path
   and the thumb indicates the direction          helping you prevent scratches, break         will curve and avoid the scratch.
   of the resulting 90° tangent line. NV          up ball clusters, execute carom shots,       Another option is to use a slower
   3.5 shows some examples of how it              and avoid obstacle balls. The scratch        stroke, resulting in natural ball roll, or
   can be used.                                   example is presented here and the            a follow shot, which also avoids the
        As pointed out in Principle 1, top        other will be presented in future            scratch. The faster the shot, the longer
   and bottom spin deflect the cue ball           articles.     The 90° rule is also           the cue ball persists along the tangent
   motion away from the tangent line,             invaluable for planning the path of cue      line path before curving.
   and these effects must be taken into           ball (or any deflected ball) for position         Look forward to the next article
   account. Even when a ball is rolling           play. This topic will also be addressed      dealing with how you can use the 90°
   naturally, and not sliding across the          in future articles.                          rule to your advantage in other
   felt, it has topspin that reduces the               Diagram 4 and NV 3.7 show how           common situations.        Also coming
   angle below 90°.                               the 90° rule can be used to help you         soon is a series of articles on the
        The one exception to the 90° rule         prevent a scratch. If the object ball is     lesser-known 30° rule, which is just as
   is when the cue ball hits the object ball      pocketed with a firm stroke or slightly      useful if not more useful.
   perfectly squarely, with no cut angle.         below center, such that the cue ball is
   In this case, the cue ball stops               sliding (and not rolling) when it

                                                 tangent
                                                   line

                                                                                                                                     fast
                                                                                                                    90°
                                                                                                                                    medium
                                                                                                                                    slow
                                                 90º
                                                                                                                           follow

                                                                                                       fast
                                                                                                                draw
                                                                                                       medium             scratch
                                                                                                       slow
                                        impact
                                          line
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/the_90_degree_rule_part_ii_breakup_and_avoidance_shots.pdf
title: The 90° rule Part II - Breakup and Avoidance Shots
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                                ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
The 90° rule
Part II – Breakup and Avoidance Shots

Note: Narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and technical proofs (TP) can
be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article
correspond to the numbers used on the website.

     In my article last month, I introduced a very important principle of billiards called the 90° rule. It states that
when the cue ball strikes an object ball with no topspin or bottom spin the two balls will always separate at 90°,
regardless of the cut angle. Put another way, the cue ball will leave along the tangent line, which is perpendicular
to the impact line with the ball. Principle 1, NV 3.4, and TP 3.1 summarize and illustrate the important points (see
last months article for more information).

    As shown in last month’s article (Part I), the 90° rule is very useful for helping to prevent scratches. This
month (Part II), we look at how the same rule can also be used to plan break-up and avoidance shots. In next
month’s article (Part III) we will look at how the 90° rule can be used to plan carom and billiards shots. Hopefully,
after this series of articles, you will appreciate how important this rule is, and will be able to use it in your game.

Principle 1 90° rule

With a stun shot where there is no topspin or bottom spin, after impact the cue ball will depart along the
tangent line, which is perpendicular (at a right angle) to the impact line. In other words the cue ball and
object ball paths, after impact, will be 90° apart (see NV 3.4 and TP 3.1).

                  NV 3.4 – 90° rule with various entering angles
normal video

                  TP 3.1 – 90° rule
technical proof

     When attempting to “run the table” (i.e., make the entire sequence of balls necessary to win a game), there
will be times when you need to break up balls that are tied up and cannot be made easily. These are called
break-up shots. At other times, you will want to avoid hitting balls that are in favorable locations (e.g., balls set
up for easy shots, or balls blocking shots for your opponent). These are called avoidance shots. Being able to
visualize the tangent line path predicted by the 90° rule is an invaluable skill when planning these types of shots.

     Diagram 1 shows a table layout that presents an ideal opportunity for a break-up shot. An inexperienced
player might think: “The 2-ball is a duck in the pocket, and the cue ball is so close, I should definitely pocket that
ball first.” An experienced player would think instead: “I want to win the game by pocketing the four remaining
solids and then the 8-ball. To do this, I need to break up the 3-ball and 4-ball. Neither ball can be pocketed
easily, if at all, in their current positions. Also, the 2-ball is a good insurance policy in case I need an easy shot to
get me out of trouble later, helping me achieve position for another shot. Therefore, I will leave the 2-ball there,
pocket the 1-ball first, and break up the 3-ball and 4-ball in the process.” In a shot like this, the 2-ball is called an
insurance ball because it can be pocketed fairly easily from almost any spot on the table in case you loose
control of the cue ball on a previous shot.
                                                                      4
                                                                          3

                                                                                   1

                                      this ball cluster          object
                                    presents a problem            ball
                                       and it must be
                                         broken up
                                                                              shooting
                                                                               solids

                                        8                   insurance
                                                               ball
                                                                                         2

                                    Diagram 1 Example break-up opportunity

     Diagram 2 illustrates how the 90° rule is used to plan the break-up shot. Bottom English and medium to fast
speed is used to ensure that the cue ball has no spin when it contacts the 1-ball. The cue ball will deflect off the
1-ball and hit the 3-ball fairly squarely causing the 3-ball and 4-ball to separate and rebound off the rail. A
possible end result of the shot is shown in Diagram 3. The 3-ball and 4-ball are no longer tied up. And more
importantly, now the remaining balls can be pocketed with ease, resulting in a victory. As illustrated in Diagram
4, the 3-ball is made first, then the 2-ball. After pocketing the 2-ball, the cue ball can be left in good position for a
straight-in shot on the 4-ball, resulting in an easy shot on the 8-ball.

                                                                90°

                                                        4
                                                            3

                                                                  1

                                   balls to be
                                   broken up

                                                                                         easily make-able
                                                 fast                                     “insurance ball”
                             8
                                                 medium
                                                 slow
                                                                               2

                            Diagram 2 Using the 90° rule to break up problem balls
                                                                       3

                                               4

                                    the 3-ball and 4-ball
                                     are now broken up
                                  enabling an easy run-out

                                                       easily make-able
                                       8                “insurance ball”

                                                                               2

                             Diagram 3 Possible table layout after a break-up shot

                                                                           3

                                                   4

                                           8

                                                                                   2

                               Diagram 4 Running the table after a break-up shot

     With a break-up shot, the goal is to purposely drive the cue ball into object balls. With avoidance shots, the
goal is to purposely avoid hitting certain balls. In the game of 8-ball, the balls you want to avoid could be your
own (“stripes” or “solids”) if they already happen to be in good places (e.g., close to a pocket, or blocking shots for
you opponent). The balls to avoid could also be your opponent’s balls if they happen to be in a bad place for your
opponent (e.g., tied up in a cluster). Also, sometimes you just want to avoid hitting balls so the cue ball can end
up in good position for your next shot. Diagram 5 shows a table layout where an avoidance shot is appropriate,
assuming you are shooting “solids.” The two “stripes” are tied up and you would like to leave them that way so if
you do not run the table your opponent will be faced with a difficult shot. You also need to avoid the “stripes” to
reliably control the position of the cue ball.
                                                                    3

                                            2

                                           opponent cluster
                                            to be avoided

                                                                                     8

                                                                1
                                         shooting
                                          solids

                         Diagram 5 Example table layout requiring an avoidance shot

     Diagram 6 shows how knowledge of the 90° rule tangent line and the effects of English can be used to plan
the path of the cue ball, assuming the 1-ball will be pocketed first. Note that the 90° rule predicts that the cue ball
would deflect directly into the tied up “stripes.” But remember, the 90° rule only applies exactly in the case of a
stun shot, where the cue ball is sliding without topspin or bottom spin. To have the cue ball avoid the “stripe”
cluster, you can use a medium speed follow stoke as shown in the diagram. The cue ball will be rolling when it
hits the 1-ball and the resulting path will be short of the tangent line (i.e., the resulting angle is less than 90°). The
deflected cue ball path leaves the “stripes” undisturbed and results in good position for the 2-ball shot. A principle
called the 30° rule, which can be used to predict the exact path of the cue ball, will be presented in a future article.
Diagram 7 shows how the remainder of the table can be run easily, resulting in victory.

                                                                            3

                                                  2                                 90°
                                                                                tangent line

                                             cue ball path
                                             avoiding the
                                           opponent’s cluster
                                                                                          8

                                                                        1            < 90°
                                                      fast
                                                      medium
                                                      slow

                             Diagram 6 Using the 30° rule to plan an avoidance shot
                                                                   3

                                             2

                                                                                 8

                               Diagram 7 Running the table after an avoidance shot

     I hope that by now, you agree that knowing the 90° rule is a good thing. With experience, you develop
intuition for where the cue ball will go after hitting an object ball, but it is still nice to be able to check yourself with
the principle. Just in case you still aren’t convinced of the value of the 90° rule, I will show some more examples
of how it is used in practice next month. Good luck with your game!
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/the_90_degree_rule_part_iii_carom_and_billiard_shots.pdf
title: The 90° rule Part III - Carom and Billiards Shots
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                                                   ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
The 90° rule
Part III – Carom and Billiards Shots

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and technical
proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the article (e.g., NV 3.4) help you locate the resources on the website.

      In my previous two articles, I introduced the 90° rule. It states that when the cue ball strikes an object ball
with no topspin or bottom spin, the two balls will separate at 90°, regardless of the cut angle. The cue ball leaves
along the tangent line, which is perpendicular to the impact line (see Diagram 1). Principle 1 and NV 3.4
summarize and illustrate the important points of the rule. The 90° rule is very useful for helping to prevent
scratches (see Part I in the January, 2004 issue) and to plan break-up and avoidance shots (see Part II in the
February, 2004 issue). In this article (Part III) we will look at how the 90° rule can also be used to plan carom and
billiards shots. We will also see how the 90° rule is important in position play.

Principle 1 90° rule

With a stun shot where there is no topspin or bottom spin, after impact the cue ball will depart along the
tangent line, which is perpendicular (at a right angle) to the impact line. In other words the cue ball and
object ball paths, after impact, will be 90° apart (see Diagram 1, NV 3.4 and TP 3.1).

                                                                    impact
                                                                      line
                                                                                 the deflected
                                                                                object ball and
                                                                   90°
                                                                                cue ball paths
                                                                                 are 90º apart
                                                                    tangent
                                                                      line

                                 Diagram 1 The 90° rule impact and tangent lines

                  NV 3.4 – 90° rule with various entering angles
normal video

                  TP 3.1 – 90° rule
technical proof

    With a billiard shot, you deflect (“kiss”) the cue ball off one object ball into another to pocket the second
object ball (see Diagram 2). In a carom shot, you deflect (“kiss”) an object ball off a second object ball to send
the first object ball into a pocket or into another target (see Diagram 3). Billiard and carom shots can be difficult
and intimidating at first, but if you are comfortable with the 90° rule, these shots can be extremely useful weapons
in your arsenal.

   In Diagram 2, a billiard shot is used to deflect the cue ball off the 1-ball to pocket the 2-ball. Slight bottom
English is used to achieve cue ball stun at contact with the 1-ball. If no bottom spin were used with the slow to
medium speed shown, the cue ball would start rolling before reaching the 1-ball and the 90° rule would no longer
apply (the cue ball would not deflect as much). The stun results in the cue ball deflecting off the 1-ball
perpendicular to (i.e., exactly 90° away from) the impact line with the 1-ball. After deflecting off the 1-ball, the cue
ball travels along the tangent line to pocket the 2-ball (see NV 7.2). Given the ball layout in Diagram 2, this shot
is the only one with a reasonable chance of pocketing a ball. Fortunately, if you can visualize the impact line and
cue ball ghost ball position (see NV 3.1) required to create the cue ball tangent line path, the billiard shot is easy
to execute. The easiest way to aim the shot is to first visualize the post-impact cue ball tangent line to the target
ball (e.g., using your cue stick), then visualize the required impact line perpendicular to that line (see NV 7.2).
Then aim at the first object ball to drive the cue ball along this line.

                                  fast                                   2
                                  medium
                                  slow

                                                1                                        the cue ball
                                                         90º                          caroms (deflects)
                                                                                  off the 1st object ball in
                                                                                 the tangent line direction
                                   impact
                                     line
                                                                     3

                                            Diagram 2 Cue ball billiard shot

                 NV 7.2 – Cue ball billiard shot
normal video

                 NV 3.1 – Practicing contact point and ghost ball visualization
normal video

     The 90° degree rule, in addition to applying to a cue ball striking an object ball, also applies to one object ball
striking another. However, the requirement of stun still applies. In other words, the first object ball must be sliding
and not rolling when it strikes the second object ball. For this to be the case, the first object ball must be either
struck hard (by the cue ball) or be close to the second object ball so it doesn’t have enough time to develop much
roll (i.e., it will be mostly sliding across the felt). If the first object ball is rolling when it strikes the second, the two
balls will separate at less than 90° as with a follow shot. Diagram 3 shows a carom shot where the 1-ball is
deflected off the 5-ball to pocket the 3-ball. This shot sounds complicated, but it really is not much more difficult
than the cue ball billiard shot shown in Diagram 2. It would be much more difficult if the cue ball were farther
away from the 1-ball and if a larger cut angle were required on the 1-ball. The aiming procedure is the same as
above. First visualize the 1-ball tangent line path, then visualize the perpendicular impact line for the 5-ball, and
then aim the 1-ball at the 5-ball to send the 1-ball along the tangent line (see NV 7.3). One major difference with
object ball carom shots versus cue ball billiard shots is that you do not have as much control over the spin of the
carom ball (e.g., the 1-ball in Diagram 3). With a billiard shot, you have total control over the cue ball English.
But with an object ball carom the only way to ensure stun for the carom ball impact is to hit the shot hard,
especially if there is significant separation distance between the carom object ball (the 1-ball) and the first impact
ball (the 5-ball). In Diagram 3, because the 1-ball is fairly close to the 5-ball, the speed does not need to be
excessive, but it still needs to be fairly fast. If the shot were hit much softer, the 1-ball would be rolling by the time
it gets to the 5-ball and the 1-ball would deflect away from the tangent line.

                                                                                 3
                                                                             1

                                                   2
                                               1
                                                       1                                     the 1-ball
                       fast
                                                           5                            caroms (deflects)
                       medium
                                                                   90º                 off the 5-ball in the
                       slow                                              6            tangent line direction
                                                               4

                                          impact
                                            line

                                         Diagram 3 Object ball carom shot

                NV 7.3 – Object ball carom shot
normal video

     In Parts I, II, and III of this article series, we have seen how the 90° rule can be used to help prevent
scratches, plan break-up and avoidance shots, and plan carom and billiard shots. I want to close the series by
showing how the 90° rule is also an invaluable tool for good position control, where you need to predict where the
cue ball will go in planning a subsequent shot. Diagram 4 shows an example of how the 90° rule is used along
with good speed control to achieve good cue ball control. In the diagram, the 90° rule is used to help determine
the path the cue ball will take after pocketing the 1-ball. The only thing that remains is to judge the speed
necessary to have the cue ball travel the correct distance along the path. The diagram shows how different
speeds are used to achieve position for three different follow-on shots. If your goal is to achieve position for the
2-ball shot after the 1-ball shot, a soft draw (bottom English) shot is appropriate. The draw is required to ensure
the cue ball will be sliding (i.e., be in stun) by the time it impacts the 1-ball. If the cue ball were hit with a center
stroke, it would be rolling (with topspin) when it hits the 1-ball. In that case, the cue ball and 1-ball would not
separate at 90° (the angle would be less than 90°). If your goal is to achieve position for the 3-ball shot instead,
you would use more speed, and less draw is required. For the 4-ball position shot, because the shot is hit fairly
hard, the cue ball can be hit with a center stroke. For a higher speed, the cue ball does not have time to develop
roll before hitting the 1-ball.
                                     fast
                                     medium
                                     slow
                                                           3                                1
                                                                                                90°

                                                                                fast
                                                                                medium
                   4                                                            slow
                                                  fast
                                                  medium
                                                  slow
                                                                                                  2

                           Diagram 4 The 90° rule as an integral part of position play

     With all three shots in Diagram 4, knowledge of the 90° rule allows you to predict the path of the cue ball after
impact with the object ball (the 1-ball). This reduces position play to a simple matter of speed control. If you can
predict the direction of the cue ball path and have a good feel for speed, you will be a good position player. The
only way to gain good speed control skills is to practice a lot. As with all articles in my series and with the other
article series in the magazine, you should always try to practice all of the shots shown to help you develop the
skills and intuition necessary to be able to apply the techniques in games that count.

    Hopefully, after this series of articles, you will appreciate the importance of the 90° rule and be able to use it in
your game. In the next series of articles, we will look at the lesser-known 30° rule, which is also very useful for
predicting the path of the cue ball after hitting an object ball.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO. His book, “The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards,” is coming out this August.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/the_amazing_world_of_billiards_physics.pdf
title: The Amazing World of Billiards Physics May, 2007
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“The Amazing World of Billiards Physics”

                                          David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE (“Dr. Dave”)
                                           Department of Mechanical Engineering
                                                 Colorado State University

                                                          May, 2007

               Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and technical proofs
               (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at http://billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in
               the article help you locate the resources on the website.

    It’s 1810, you’re in a French prison, but because you are a model prisoner, you are given
access to a pool table donated by a local aristocrat. Your cue stick is an old style “mace” that has
a solid wooden tip, because the cue tip hasn’t been invented yet. The wooden tip cracks and fails
to make good contact with the cue ball anymore ... not that it ever really did. You decide to tear
a small piece of leather off your shoe to attach to the cracked end of the mace to improve cue ball
contact. All of the sudden, your accuracy and possible arsenal of shots improve dramatically.

    Sounds like an unlikely story? Well, that’s pretty much what happened to Francois Mingaud,
the imprisoned Frenchman credited with inventing the leather cue tip. The leather tip allowed a
cueist to put “English” on the cue ball, which is sidespin caused by hitting the cue ball off center.
So a “Frenchman” invented billiards “English.” (By the way, the British use the term “side”
instead of “English” to refer to sidespin.) “English” allows the shooter to better control where
the cue ball goes during a shot (e.g., see NV 4.25). The cue tip was a monumental invention for
the pool world; and interesting, the equipment really hasn’t changed much since. We still use
wooden cue sticks with leather cue tips.

                      NV 4.25 – Positioning the cue ball at all spots on the table from an easy side pocket shot
normal video

     Well, the main purpose of this article isn’t to tell the story of the history of billiards
equipment. Instead, we will look at the wonderful world of billiards physics and show how a
little physics knowledge can help you be a better pool player. First, let’s start with some
terminology.

Terminology

     “Billiards” is a term that generally refers to all cue sports. This includes pocket billiards,
played on a table with pockets. American pool and British snooker are the two most common
types of pocket billiards. 8-ball and 9-ball are the two most common pool games. Some
billiards games are played on tables without pockets. The most common is three-cushion
billiards played with only three balls. Before pool halls came along in America, three-cushion
billiards was a very popular game. The term pool comes from its early history where wagering
(like a football “pool”) was often part of the game (and still is in many pool halls).

                                                            1 / 17
    Figure 1 illustrates most of the important terms used to describe pool shots. The cue stick
hits the cue ball (CB) into an object ball (OB). After collision, the CB heads in the tangent line
direction and the OB heads in the impact line (AKA line of centers) direction. The key to aiming
pool shots is to be able to visualize the ghost ball (GB) target. This is the where the CB must be
when it touches the OB to send the OB in the desired direction, which is along the line
connecting the centers of the GB and OB (see NV 3.1 and NV 3.2 for advice on how to practice
and improve your visualization and aiming skills).

                                         imaginary
                                       ghost ball (GB)             tangent
                                           target                    line

                                                                                   aiming
                          cue                                                        line
                                          cue
                          stick           ball                              cut
                                         (CB)                              angle
                                                  object
                                                   ball                line of centers
                                                  (OB)                   (impact line)

                                         Figure 1 Pool terminology

               NV 3.1 – Practicing contact point and ghost ball visualization
normal video
               NV 3.2 – Using the cue stick to help visualize the impact and aiming lines

     Figure 1 is what happens ideally, in the diagram of a book or magazine article.
Unfortunately, in real life, several non-ideal effects come into play. As shown in Figure 2, when
using sidespin, the CB squirts away from the aiming line (see NV 4.13 and NV A.17), swerves
on its way to the OB (see NV 4.14 and NV 7.12), and throws the OB off the impact line direction
on its way to the target (see NV 4.15, NV 4.16, and NV A.21). Squirt and swerve will be
described below, and a whole section will be dedicated to throw. If you don’t compensate your
aim for squirt, swerve, and throw when playing pool (consciously or sub-consciously), you will
never be a great player. After learning a little more about these effects, maybe you will know a
little better why you might have missed some pool shots in the past; if not, at least you will have
a few more excuses if you miss more in the future.

                                                    2 / 17
                                                                                      throw
                                               squirt       thrown OB
                                                                                      angle
                                               angle         direction
                              initial
                           CB direction
                                                                                    impact
                                                                                      line

                                                                               right
                   bottom-right           aiming             curved        English (spin)
                     English                line            CB path           on CB
                                                            (swerve)

                                    Figure 2 Non-ideal sidespin effects

               NV 4.13 – Squirt due to high speed sidespin
               NV 4.14 – English curve due to an elevated cue
               NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
               NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video   NV 7.12 – Small-curve massé shot
               NV A.17 – English deflection (squirt) vs. speed
               NV A.21 – Bank shot using throw and spin transfer

     Figure 3 shows selected stills from a high-speed-video movie that illustrates the physics
behind squirt. The full clip can be viewed, in super-slow-motion, at HSV A.49. First note the
cue tip is in contact with the ball only between the 2nd and 3rd stills. The “3000FPS” at the
bottom-right portion of the still indicates that the clip was filmed at 3000 frames per second. The
elapsed time (being counted down) is shown on the 2nd line at the top-right of each still. The
elapsed time between the 2nd and 3rd stills is only 0.001 second (see the timer in the 2nd line of
text in the images). This is actually quite typical for most pool shot ... the cue tip is in contact
with the CB only for about a thousandth of a second! The duration from the 1st to the last (6th)
still is only 0.0127 second (a little more than a hundredth of a second).

    In Figure 3, note how much the cue stick deflects away from the CB as a result of the
impact. This explains why the CB squirts in the opposite direction. Newton said that for every
action, there is an equal and opposite reaction. If the cue stick deflects to one side, there must be
force acting on the tip in that direction and on the CB in the opposite direction. So the force that
causes the cue stick to deflect and vibrate with sidespin shots (e.g., see HSV 4.4) is the same
force that causes the CB to squirt off its aiming line. The force is related to how much end mass
the cue stick has. “Low-squirt” cue sticks (e.g., Predator’s Z-shaft) have low end-masses to limit
how much sideways force can be supported. With less mass, there is less force and, therefore,
less squirt (i.e., the CB will go closer to the direction you are aiming).

                                                   3 / 17
                       Figure 3 Close-up of cue tip impact during a large-offset follow shot

                   HSV A.49 – Follow shot with large offset, light grip, good follow-through, and fast speed
high-speed video   HSV 4.4 - Deflection (squirt) due to high-speed English

    Swerve is caused by the fact that the cue stick is always elevated some (to clear the rails
bordering the table). Because of this, when you hit the CB off center, the ball picks up two spin
components. One component is sidespin caused by the moment arm of the cue tip about the
vertical axis of the CB. Pure sidespin has no effect on the path of the CB until it hits a rail
cushion (see NV 4.10 and NV 4.11). The other spin component is called massé spin. It is
caused by the downward component of the stick’s impact force, which results from the
downward angle of the cue stick. This spin is like the “body roll” of an airplane or the “Eskimo
roll” of a kayak. HSV A.127 shows a good example of the direction and effect of massé spin.
The friction between the CB and cloth, caused by the massé spin component, is perpendicular to
the CB’s direction of motion; hence, the CB’s path is curved. With more cue stick elevation, the
amount of massé spin will be greater, and the CB’s path will be more curved (e.g., see NV 7.11).
Maybe you have seen some dramatic examples of this on TV if you have ever watched one of
ESPN’s Trick Shot Magic pool tournaments.
                   NV 4.10 – Effect of left English
                   NV 4.11 – Effect of right English
normal video       NV 7.11 – Large-curve massé shot

                   HSV A.127 – Massé shot
high-speed video

                                                        4 / 17
Coriolis, the mathematician, physicist, and ... billiards expert

    In 1835, Gaspard-Gustave Coriolis wrote a comprehensive book presenting the physics of
pool and billiards. This is the same Coriolis who discovered the “Coriolis” effect that accounts
for the dynamics of artillery shells, hurricanes, and flushing toilets. (The toilets part isn’t quite
true, but it would take too long to explain.) Coriolis was not only a great mathematician and
physicist ... he was also an avid billiards enthusiast. Coriolis’ billiards physics book has not been
very widely read because it was written in French, and an English translation has become
available only recently (in 2005 by David Nadler [1]). Also, it is very difficult to read and
understand by today’s standards. I had the pleasure to review the manuscript a few years ago,
and I was blown away by the thoroughness and informative nature of the book (maybe a more
appropriate word is tomb). He had studied and totally figured out pretty much every physical
principle that describes what happens at pool table. And the leather tip had only just been
invented a few years before his time. Coriolis was probably not that good of a pool player
himself – his mathematics and physics endeavors didn’t leave him with much spare time – but
luckily, he had pool-playing acquaintances that provided creative inspiration and provocative
questions for his math and physics studies.

    I was so inspired by Coriolis’ work that I wrote a series of six articles for Billiards Digest
magazine, presenting his billiards discoveries. This was quite the challenge because I had to
attempt to present the work of this brilliant mathematician and physicist in a manner that could
be understood by the readership of a billiards magazine, most of who do not have advanced
technical degrees. I’ll share a brief summary of some of Coriolis’ results below. Much more
information can be found in my July-December 2005 instructional articles (“Coriolis was
Brilliant ... but he didn’t have a High-speed Camera”) available on my website.

    Following is a brief summary of some of Coriolis’ conclusions, which he backed up with
theoretical and limited experimental studies.

1. The curved path followed by a CB after impact with an OB, due to top or bottom spin, is
   always parabolic (see Figure 4 and TP A.4). This is useful to know when you are trying to
   predict where the CB will go for shots with different types of spin (e.g., see NV 4.20 and NV
   4.21). Figure 4 shows the effect of both bottom spin (called a draw shot) and topspin (called
   a follow shot). If the CB had no spin, it would head in the tangent-line direction (per the 90°
   rule in the next section). With top or bottom spin, the axis of the spin is perpendicular to the
   direction of motion to begin with, so it results in no curving of the CB’s initial path. After
   the CB deflects off the OB, the direction of motion changes, but the spin axis remains close
   to its original direction, as a result of the principle of conservation of angular momentum.
   The spin now creates a friction force between the ball and cloth that has a component
   perpendicular to the direction of travel. This results in the curving of the path, much like
   with a massé shot. Because the friction force is nearly constant, the acceleration will also be
   nearly constant. This is the same situation as with projectiles in a gravitational field, which
   also experience constant acceleration. Hence, the CB curves with the same parabolic shape
   as the flight path of a projectile (e.g., a baseball or golf ball struck with no spin). The
   detailed math and physics can be found in TP A.4.

                                               5 / 17
                                                                           tangent
                                                       parabolic             line
                                       fast             cue ball
                                       medium            paths
                                       slow

                                                                                      fast
                                                                                      medium
                                                                                      slow

                                                                      aiming line
                                                  impact
                                                    line

                                              Figure 4 Parabolic CB paths

                  TP A.4 – Post-impact CB trajectory for any cut angle, speed, and spin
technical proof

                  NV 4.20 – Delay of follow and tangent-line deviation with higher speed
normal video
                  NV 4.21 – Delay of draw and tangent-line deviation with higher speed

2. To achieve maximum sidespin, the point of contact of the cue tip with the CB should be half a
   ball radius off center (see Figure 5). Obviously, the farther you hit the CB off center, the
   more sidespin you impart. Although, if the tip offset exceeds the half-ball-radius (0.5R)
   amount, a miscue (where the cue tip slides off the CB during impact) is very likely (see NV
   2.1 and HSV 2.1). Needless to say, a miscue is undesirable in a game situation, especially if
   there is money on the line. The detailed math and physics behind miscues can be found in
   TP 2.1.

                                                           contact
                                                            point

                                                                      R

                                                                    0.5R
                                                                                     maximum
                                                                                      English

                               Figure 5 Contact point offset for maximum sidespin

                  NV 2.1 – Miscue due to off-center hit with no chalk
normal video

                                                           6 / 17
                       HSV 2.1 – Miscue due to off-center hit with no chalk
high-speed video

                       TP 2.1 – Minimum cue tip friction required for no-slip horizontal impact
technical proof

3. With a massé shot, the final path of the CB will be in a direction parallel to the line drawn
   between the initial base point of the CB and the aiming point on the table. The technique is
   illustrated in Figure 6. The final direction of the CB path is parallel to line RA, which
   connects the original CB resting point (point R) to the aiming point on the cloth (point A).
   Using the letters shown in the diagram, with “B” indicating the CB contact point, I refer to
   the Coriolis massé aiming system as the “BAR” method (“B” for ball, “A” for aim, and “R”
   for resting point). This technique can be useful when trying to aim massé shots, where you
   need to curve the CB around an obstacle ball (e.g., see NV 7.11). The detailed math and
   physics behind the BAR massé aiming method and resulting ball paths can be found in TP
   A.19.

                                              aiming
                                                line

                        contact point                                                             curved
                       on the cue ball             resting point                                  cue ball
                             (B)                  of the cue ball                                  path
                                                   on the table                     fast

                                                        (R)                         medium
                    aiming point                                                    slow

                  on the table cloth
                         (A)                                                                  A R
                                                                                               B
                                                                           theoretical
                                                                         final direction
                                          side view
                                                                           of cue ball
                                                                       (in RA direction)

                                                                                           top view

                                         Figure 6 “BAR” massé shot aiming method

                       NV 7.11 – Large-curve massé shot
normal video

                       TP A.19 – Massé shot aiming method, and curved cue ball paths
technical proof

                                                            7 / 17
4. For a CB with natural roll, the largest deflection angle the CB can experience after impact
   with an OB is 33.7°, which occurs at a cut angle of 28.1° (see the next section for
   illustrations and a lot more info on why this is useful to know).

90º and 30º rules

     Before looking closer at Coriolis’ fourth conclusion in the previous section, I need to cover a
little more basic pool physics. A very important skill for aiming and planning shots is the ability
to predict where the CB will go after impact with an OB. The most important thing in pool is
making a shot. The second most important thing is knowing where the CB will go so you can
easily make the next shot. Figure 7 illustrates one of the most important principles of pool
related to this – the 90° rule (see NV 3.4, NV 3.5, and TP 3.1). It states that when the CB strikes
an OB with no topspin or bottom spin, the two balls will always separate at 90°. In other words,
the CB will head exactly in the tangent line direction and persist along this line. This is true
regardless of the cut angle (see Figure 7).

                                                                90°
                                 (a) small cut

                                                                 impact
                                                                   line
                                                                                 the deflected
                                                                90°             OB and CB paths
                                                                                 are 90º apart
                               (b) medium cut
                                                                  tangent
                                                                    line

                                                                90°

                                 (c) large cut

                                               Figure 7 The 90° rule

                  NV 3.4 – 90° rule with various cut angles
                  NV 3.5 – Using your hand to visualize the 90° rule impact and tangent lines
normal video
                  NV 3.6 – Stop shot
                  NV 3.7 – Using the 90° rule to check for and prevent a scratch

                  TP 3.1 – 90° rule
technical proof

    The 90° rule is a direct result of the principles of conservation of energy and conservation of
linear momentum (see the math and physics details in TP 3.1). All of the CB’s momentum in
the impact line direction (see Figure 7b) gets transferred to the OB. The result is that the final

                                                       8 / 17
paths of the balls are perpendicular. This is what happens ideally. In real life, there is a small
amount of energy loss and retention of impact-line momentum when the CB hits the OB. This
effect is quantified with what is called the coefficient of restitution (COR). The COR for perfect
(ideal) balls would be 1, representing 100% conservation of energy and complete momentum
transfer. Typical pool balls have a COR closer to 0.93. The result is that the 90° rule is actually
closer to the 85° rule (see TP A.5).

                   TP A.5 – The effects of ball inelasticity and friction on the 90° rule
technical proof

    The 90° rule applies exactly only for a stun shot, where the CB is sliding without topspin or
bottom spin at impact with the OB. The one exception to the 90° rule is when the CB hits the
OB perfectly squarely, with no cut angle. In this case, the CB stops completely (i.e., it gets
stunned into place), transferring all of its speed to the OB. This is called a stop shot (see NV
3.6, HSV 3.1, and HSV 3.2). Notice how in HSV 3.1, to achieve a stop shot, one must often hit
the CB below center to create bottom spin, which wears off, so the CB has no spin at impact with
the OB.

                   NV 3.6 – Stop shot
normal video

                   HSV 3.1 – Stop shot showing loss of bottom spin over distance
high-speed video   HSV 3.2 – Stop-shot to prevent a scratch

    Figure 8 illustrates the physics involved with a stop shot. As the CB slides along the cloth,
the friction force between the ball and cloth creates a torque about the ball’s center that gradually
reduces (decelerates) the bottom spin (see Figure 8b). If the CB were to continue to slide, the
friction force would continue to change the CB’s spin, slowly building up forward roll (e.g., top
spin), as shown in Figure 8a. Note how the CB actually slows down (as indicated by the lengths
of the straight arrows in the figure) as the topspin builds, because the sliding friction force is in
the opposite direction as the ball’s motion. Figure 8c shows what happens if the CB starts out
with over-spin (more topspin than the roll amount). The excess quickly wears off, and the CB
starts rolling. In this case, the CB actually speeds up a little because the sliding friction force
actually pushes the ball forward. When the CB is rolling, there is no longer any sliding friction,
and the CB continues to roll naturally until the ball slows to a stop or hits something (e.g.,
another ball or a rail). If the CB is struck with the cue tip at exactly the right height above
center, the ball will roll immediately. The technical term for this height is the center of
percussion (COP), also known as the sweet spot, a term also used to describe the ideal impact
location for a baseball bat or tennis racket. For a pool ball, the COP is at 70% of the ball’s
height above the table surface (see the math and physics details in TP 4.2). To get over-spin
(e.g., as in Figure 8c), the CB must be struck above this height, which is risky due to likelihood
for miscue.

                                                          9 / 17
                                           stun               increasing          normal
                                         (no spin)              topspin             roll
                                                                                               table
                                                                                              surface

                                                     a) stun shot

                                                             decreasing           stun
                                      bottom spin
                                                             bottom spin        (no spin)

                                                    b) draw shot

                                                             decreasing          normal
                                        over-spin              topspin             roll

                                                    c) follow shot

                      Figure 8 Conversion of vertical-plane spin to normal roll (side view)

                  TP 4.2 – Center of percussion of the cue ball
technical proof

     As described above, with most pool shots, the CB will be rolling by the time it reaches the
OB. The exception is where bottom spin and/or fast speeds are being used. When the CB is
rolling, the 90° rule no longer applies. What applies instead is governed by what I call the 30º
rule (see Figure 9, NV 3.8, NV 3.9, and NV 3.10). It states that when a rolling CB hits an OB
close to a half-ball hit (see Figure 10), the CB will deflect approximately 30° away from its
initial aiming line. In TP 3.3, I show the detailed physics and math behind the rule. I also show
a modern proof for the numbers in Coriolis’ 4th conclusion (see the previous section).

                                                        10 / 17
                                                            the cue ball’s path
                                            fast            is deflected by 30°
                                            medium
                                            slow

                                                                           30° deflected angle

                                                                                     aiming
                                                                                       line

                               relaxed, but firm, peace sign used
                               to visualize the 30° direction

                                                   Figure 9 30° rule

                                                                         half-ball
                                                                            hit

                                               Figure 10 Half-ball hit

                  NV 3.8 – Using your hand to visualize the 30° rule
                  NV 3.9 – 30° rule example
normal video      NV 3.10 – Using the 30° rule to check for and prevent a scratch

                  TP 3.3 – 30° rule
technical proof

    As shown in Figure 9 and demonstrated in NV 3.8, you can use your hand to help visualize
the 30° CB direction. As shown in Figure 11, if you form a relaxed but firm V-shape (peace
sign or victory symbol) with your index and middle fingers, the angle between your fingers will
be very close to 30°. NV 3.8, and NV 3.9 show how to use the Dr. Dave peace sign in practice.
If you point one of the fingers in the aiming line direction, the other finger will indicate the
direction the CB will travel after impact.

    You might be asking yourself: “How often does a pool player face half-ball hits, and is the
30° rule so useful after all?” Fortunately, as shown in Figure 12, the 30° rule applies over a
wide range of ball-hit fractions (see TP 3.3 for the math and physics details). The center of the
range is the half-ball hit, but the CB deflection is very close to 30° for ball-hit fractions as small
as 1/4 and as large as 3/4. Figure 13 illustrates the ball-hit-fraction range, and corresponding cut
angles, to illustrate the wide range of shots for which the 30° rule applies. With a 1/4-ball hit
(see Figure 13a), the center of the CB is aimed outside of the object-ball edge such that the
projected cue-ball-path passes through 1/4 of the OB. With a 1/2-ball hit (see Figure 13b), the
center of the CB is aimed directly at the edge of the OB such that the projected cue-ball-path

                                                       11 / 17
passes through 1/2 of the OB. With a 3/4-ball hit (see Figure 13c), the center of the CB is aimed
inside of the object-ball edge such that the projected cue-ball-path passes through 3/4 of the OB.
These three cases cover a fairly large range of cut angles.

                                                                                                 deflected
                original                                                                          cue ball
              (incoming)                                                                           path
                cue ball
                  path

                                                           30º

                                      Figure 11 Using your hand to visualize the 30° rule CB paths

                                               40º
                   cue ball deflection angle

                                               30º

                                               20º                  wide margin of error

                                               10º
                                                                        half-ball hit

                                                              1/4             1/2          3/4       1

                                                                      ball-hit fraction

                                                 Figure 12 Large margin of error for 30° rule

                                                                    12 / 17
                                                             the cue ball path is deflected by
                                                             approximately 30º in each case

                                                           medium                         small
                             large                        cut angle                     cut angle
                           cut angle
                                             ~30º                          ~30º                        ~30º

                                   1/4                                    1/2              3/4

               top view:

            side view:
        (looking along the
           aiming line)
                                       1/4                          1/2                          3/4
                                 a) 1/4-ball hit              b) 1/2-ball hit             c) 3/4-ball hit

                                         Figure 13 Various ball-hit fractions

    The 30° rule and peace sign technique are extremely useful in practice. This is a great
example where a little knowledge of the physics of the game can be a big help. The rule can be
used to detect possible scratches (where you pocket the CB by mistake), plan carom shots (where
you deflect one ball off another into a pocket), plan ball avoidance or break-up shots, and
strategically plan CB position as you run a rack of balls. Examples of all of these types of shots
can be found on my website (e.g., see NV 3.7, NV 3.10, NV 7.2, NV 7.3, NV 7.4, and NV A.1).
                    NV 3.7 – Using the 90° rule to check for and prevent a scratch
                    NV 3.10 – Using the 30° rule to check for and prevent a scratch
                    NV 7.2 – Cue ball billiard shot
normal video
                    NV 7.3 – Object ball carom shot
                    NV 7.4 – 30° rule billiard shot
                    NV A.1 – Cut shot vs. carom shot example

Throw

    An area of study I’ve spent much time on recently is the physics and applications of ball
throw. Throw refers to the change in OB direction due to sliding friction forces between the CB
and OB during impact. Because of throw, the OB doesn’t go in the direction you might think it
should (see Figure 2). NV 4.15, 4.16, 7.5, and 7.6 show various examples of both collision-
induced throw, caused by cut angle, and spin-induced throw, caused by sidespin.

                                                        13 / 17
               NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
               NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video
               NV 7.5 – Frozen ball throw
               NV 7.6 – Frozen cue-ball throw

    Figure 14 illustrates all of the important terminology and physics concerning throw. Throw
occurs any time there is relative sliding motion between the CB and OB surfaces at impact. In
the figure, the relative motion is a result of CB sidespin, so the resulting throw would be called
spin-induced throw. The right (counterclockwise) sidespin creates a sliding friction force that
pushes the OB to the left. This force is what creates the throw angle. Because the throwing force
is pushing on the edge of the OB, it also causes the OB to rotate about its center. Imagine
pushing on the outside of a wheel ... the wheel will turn as a result. The spin imparted to the OB
is called transferred spin. In this case, the throwing force to the left creates clockwise
transferred spin on the OB. This can be important in certain types of shots (e.g., see NV A.21).

                                            throw
                                            angle
                                                        impact
                                              OB          line
                                             motion

                                                                        OB
                                                                       center
                              transferred
                                  spin
                                                        OB
                                                                  throwing
                                                                    force
                                                main
                                               impact
                                                force
                                                               CB
                                                              motion

                                                                          CB
                                                                        English
                                                         CB

                       Figure 14 Throw and spin transfer terminology and physics

                                                    14 / 17
   I am so excited about the math and physics of throw and spin transfer, I must share at least a
small part of my throw analysis results with you. How about:

                                    − c (v sin(φ ) − Rω z )2 + ( Rω x cos(φ ) )2                                                 
                           aµ + bµ e µ                                           v cos(φ )                                       
                   −1                                                              
      θ throw = tan min                                                                      , 1 7 (v sin(φ ) − Rω z )    v cos(φ )
                         
                                  (v sin(φ ) − Rω z )2 + (Rω x cos(φ ) )2                            
                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                 

Isn’t it beautiful? Actually, I know that this throw equation probably isn’t very pretty and just
“looks like Greek” to most of you (as it should, because it has many Greek letters in it), but
please bear with me. Amazingly, this single equation explains practically every effect and
principle related to throw, both collision-induced and spin-induced. The equation provides
insight into the effects of speed, cut angle, sidespin, and ball friction, and the results are in
agreement with numerous observations and experiments. The complete math and physics details
can be found in TP A.14.

                     TP A.14 – The effects of cut angle, speed, and spin on OB throw
technical proof

    Figure 15 shows an example plot generated with the throw equation. This particular plot
shows how the amount of throw changes with cut angle for a stun shot (i.e., sliding CB) at
various speeds (slow, medium, and fast). Useful conclusions one can observe from the figure
include:
• for small cut angle shots (i.e., fuller hits), the amount of throw does not vary with shot speed,
    but increases with cut angle.
• for larger cut angle shots (i.e., thinner hits), the amount of throw is significantly larger for
    slower speed shots as compared to faster speed shots.
• the amount of throw decreases a little at large cut angles, but not by much (especially for
    slower speed shots).
• the maximum throw occurs at close to a half-ball hit (30º cut angle).

All of this information is useful to know at the table; and if you don’t know how to adjust for
these effects (consciously or subconsciously), you won’t be a great player.

                                                                    15 / 17
                                        theoretical CIT

              7

              6

              5

              4                                                                    slow
      throw

                                                                                   medium
              3                                                                    fast

              2

              1

              0
                  0   10       20          30             40      50      60
                                        cut angle

                            Figure 15 Stun shot collision-induced throw

   Many more plots like Figure 15, which apply to various types of shots, can be found in TP
A.14. Also, many more conclusions and results are summarized that can be useful to know in
game situations (see the instructional articles on my website for more information).
Conclusions

    Well, I hope you have enjoyed my article. I also hope that you now agree that a little
knowledge of pool physics might even be useful (or at least, interesting). If you’re still not
convinced, check out more of my instructional articles and video demonstrations online at
billiards.colostate.edu. Also, if you like the super-slow-motion high-speed-video stuff, check
out high_speed_video.colostate.edu. There, you can find almost everything imaginable
including shooting a shaken pop can with a pellet gun, dropping a cube of Jell-O, bouncing and
puncturing water balloons, and dropping an egg on a rat trap. You can even see performances of
various stupid human and animal tricks ... all in super-slow-motion for your viewing pleasure.
Enjoy!

    If you want to learn more about playing and understanding the physics of pool, I’ve provided
some useful references below. However, I should warn you that references 1, 2, and 3, and the
TPs on my website, are quite technical and require strong math and physics backgrounds. If you
care more about just playing pool better, I recommend references 4 and 5 and the instructional

                                                16 / 17
articles I have posted online. Also on the website are many links to online articles, videos, and
resources available from others. There is a wealth of pool information available on the Internet.

      In closing, in the spirit of the 30° rule:

                                        If you let one finger stay,
                                     The other finger points the way.
                                                  Peace.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Bibliography

[1]       Nadler, D., Mathematical Theory of Spin, Friction, and Collision in the Game of
          Billiards, an English translation of Coriolis' 1835 book, www.coriolisbilliards.com,
          2005.
[2]       Alciatore, D., Pool and Billiards Physics Resources, billiards.colostate.edu/physics.
[3]       Marlow, W., The Physics of Pocket Billiards, Marlow Advanced Systems Technologies
          (MAST), 1995.
[4]       Alciatore, D., The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards, Sterling Publishing,
          billiards.colostate.edu, 2004.
[5]       Byrne, R., Byrne’s Complete Book of Pool Shots, Harcourt Press, 2003.

                                                   17 / 17
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/the_art_of_billiards_play.html
title: The Art of Billiards Play
topics: collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: scope_limited
authority: secondary
excluded_scopes: cue_squirt, off_center_cue_impact, cue_end_mass_calibration
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
Regis Petit - Physics of Billiards - The Art of Billiards Play
En Franais
Home/Contact
Billiards
Hydraulic ram
HNS
Relativity
Botany
Music
Ornitho
Meteo
Help
Theory of the Game
The Art
Bibliography
Billiards
The Art of Billiards Play ( Previous / Next Chapter )
Preamble ( Start / Next Paragraph )
The author R. Petit published the French article "La pratique du billard" in Magazine "Pour la Science" No. 246 in April 1998.
This article translated by P. Freedenberg and published on the "vrbilliard" Web site is not any longer available. The full text of Web article is reproduced below. In addition were added :
- Figures 1 to 4 produced by J.A. Gomez Valderrama and derived from his VRCarom simulator ;
- Figures 5 and 6, coming from R. Petit's book : Billard - Thorie du jeu (see References) ;
- Glossary and Results from the mechanics, coming from R. Petit's book : Billard - Thorie du jeu (see References) ;
- Proof of these results, produced by R. Petit on this Website.
Contents of this chapter ( Previous / Next Paragraph )
Figures
The billiards play
French-English glossary of billiard terms
Results from the mechanics of collisions as applied to billiards
Results from the mechanics of moving balls as applied to billiards
Synthesis of a theory of billiards
References
Proof of these results
Ball-ball, ball-cushion or ball-cloth collision
Cue-ball collision
Sliding movement : Ω horizontal, Wc, tc, W and WE
Rolling movement without sliding : W, t translation_stop and Ω horizontal
z-spin vector when sliding or rolling : Ω vertical and t rotation_stop
Horizontal cue stroke : sliding distances y, yb and yc
0. Figures ( Previous / Next Paragraph )
Figure 1 above : Running three cushions while skirting the second object ball
Figure 2 above : Two rail stroke
Figure 3 above : Rail-first stroke
Figure 4 above : Direct stroke
Figures 5 above : Adjustment of the fullness of first object ball hit (Figure on the left) ; Adjustment of the force of the cue stroke (Figure on the right)
Figure 6 above : Adjustment of amount of english to the cue ball
1. The billiards play ( Previous / Next Paragraph )
Rgis Petit. A knowledge of the laws of physics ensures a more reasoned and confident game. Physics both determines and explains the game's playing parameters.
Foreword
There are several types of billiards. In the
mathematician's idealized billiards, the balls are points, friction does
not exist, and rebounds follow the laws of optics. In the physicist's less
abstract model of billiards, friction influences the trajectory of the
balls, but even this model lacks the "intelligence" that is found in an
expert player's fingertips. This paper examines how physical laws and
mathematics can improve our play of this noble game.
Billiards has existed in its current form for
about a century and is steadily gathering more adherents. In particular,
French billiards or "carambola" is played with three balls and is divided
into five specialities : straight rail, balkline, cushion carom billiards,
three cushion billiards, and artistic billiards. Of these, three cushion
billiards has developed abroad, mainly in the United States and Japan ; the
"rec.sport.billiard" Internet newsgroup is a particularly rich source of
material on it.
Billiards is above all a game of practice,
based on the knowledge and the control of a certain number of techniques
(e.g., draw, follow, "mass", etc.) and of tactics (e.g., position play,
gathering, stun, etc.). The theory of billiards is based on the mechanics
of solid bodies. The first theoretical treatise on the mechanics of
billiards is, to our knowledge, that of G.G. Coriolis, published in 1835.
Other treatises followed, both in France and abroad. But works which
establish links or synthesis between these two approaches, the one quite
practical and the other very theoretical, are rare indeed. Is it really
possible to approach billiards play from the viewpoint of mechanics and
mathematics ? Is there a "reasoned practice" of billiards ? In my recently
published book (see References), which was the inspiration for this
article, interested readers will find mathematical justifications for the
assertions presented here.
To illustrate how to make use of a knowledge
of mechanics, we will consider an example of running three cushions while
skirting the second object ball (see Figure 1). The objective is to hit
the first object ball with the cue ball, then to go around the second
object ball, making the required circuit by contacting three cushions in
succession, and finally landing on the second object ball. Four variables
suffice for this shot : the height of the cue stroke, the fraction of the
first object ball that is hit, the force of the cue stroke, and the amount
of english employed.
The Height of the Contact Point
The first variable which the billiardist must
control is the height of the contact point on the cue ball. Three
possibilities are available to the player a priori : a more or less low
attack ; a more or less high attack ; or a very high attack. The objective
is to hit the first object ball, then the long rail located behind it. The
mechanics of ball motion teaches us that, after a collision between two
balls, each ball's path follows a parabolic curve, followed by a straight
segment. To obtain a curve that bends forward so as to strike the long
rail rather than the short rail, one must impart heavy follow to the cue
ball so that it folds back toward the long rail as soon after the
collision as possible. In practice, this result is obtained by a very high
point of attack on the cue ball.
The Fullness of First Object Ball Hit
The second variable to be controlled is the
fraction of the first object ball that is struck by the cue ball. Again,
there are three possibilities : ball ; ball ; or almost full. The
objective is for the cue ball to go around the second object ball after
striking the first object ball. The mechanics of collisions between two
solids teaches us that, just after a perfectly elastic collision between a
moving ball and a stationary ball of the same mass, the moving ball always
rebounds along a line tangent to the point of collision. To avoid hitting
the second object ball, it is thus necessary to raise this tangent as much
as possible, while maintaining sufficient speed to contact three cushions.
In practice, a half-ball hit does not raise the tangent line sufficiently.
While an almost full hit makes it possible to avoid hitting the second
object ball, this type of collision slows the cue ball too much. Aiming
for about a ball hit is a good compromise (see Figure 5 on the left).
Force of the Cue Stroke
The third variable to be controlled is the
force of the cue stroke, which determines the speed of the cue stick when
it hits the cue ball. Three possibilities are again available to the
player : a soft, medium, or forceful stroke. The objective is to minimize
the risk of a collision while the cue ball goes around the second object
ball. We saw previously that the cue ball departs its collision with the
first object ball along the tangent line. To avoid the second object ball,
the cue ball must follow this tangent line as far as possible. This result
is obtained by a forceful cue stroke (see Figure 5 on the right).
Amount of english to the cue ball
The fourth variable is the amount of english
imparted to the cue ball. Three possibilities are again available to the
player a priori : running english, centerball (i.e., no english), or
reverse english. The objective is to control the rebound of the cue ball
off the first rail, in order to hit three cushions before landing on the
second object ball. Mechanics teaches us that, following a collision with
a rail, the rebound of the cue ball depends on the amount of english it
possesses (see Figure 6) :
Just before colliding with a cushion, the
ball's linear velocity (Wa) may be decomposed into a velocity tangential to the
rail and a velocity perpendicular to the rail. What occurs immediately
after the collision ?
Without english (case (1)), the ball's perpendicular
velocity (Wi) after striking the rail is decreased by the rail's imperfect
elasticity, while its tangential velocity is considerably reduced by the
rubbing of the ball against the rail. These two components determine the
angle (Ai1) at which the cue ball departs from the rail.
With running or natural english (case (2)), the ball rubs
very little when it contacts the rail. The only change compared with the
preceding case relates to the tangential speed returned by the rail, which
is higher. The cue ball thus departs at a smaller angle (Ai2) from the rail.
In practice, to run three cushions before
landing on the second object ball, experience shows that one must impart a
little running english to the cue ball.
Let us now compile the various parameters that
we must apply : a very high attack on the cue ball to bend its path towards
the long rail behind the first object ball ; a ball hit on the first
object ball to go around the second object ball without losing too much
speed in the collision ; a forceful cue stroke to minimize the risk of a
premature collision ; and running english to contact three rails before
landing on the second object ball. I consider this a "reasoned practice"
to achieve a complex stroke.
On other strokes, there may generally be up to
three additional variables to control. The fifth variable is the
inclination of the cue stick with respect to the cloth, which facilitates
"mass", "piqu", and jump shots. The sixth variable is the mass of the cue
stick, which enables the cue tip to contact the cue ball closer to or
further from its edge. The final variable is the most important : choosing
the best tactic to make a successful billiard when several approaches are
possible.
The Choice of the Best Tactic
Let us consider an example (see Figure 2) from
the game of straight rail, in which the objective is to make a successful
billiard by contacting the two object balls with the cue ball ; rail
contacts are optional. Three possibilities are available to the player a
priori : direct stroke, rail-first stroke, or two rail stroke.
Mechanics teaches us that, when the cue ball is rolling without slipping
on the cloth, hitting half of the first object ball ensures that the cue
ball will run at a final angle of 40 degrees ; moreover, this final angle
is relatively insensitive to variations on either side of a half-ball hit.
Fortunately, then, we may select this fraction of the first object ball to
be hit and play two rails to achieve a low risk billiard.
For comparison, how reliable are the two
alternative tactics ? Hitting a rail (see Figure 3)
requires that a thin fraction of the first object ball be hit, and thus
implies extreme precision in aiming, which is risky in practice. A head-on
hit (see Figure 4) requires backspin on the cue ball commensurate with a precise ball
fraction and, taking into account the distance between the balls, a
sufficiently powerful cue stroke to preserve this backspin until the balls
collide, which is even riskier. In practice, a player should try to select
robust two rail tactics : a high point of attack to make the cue ball roll
without slipping against the cloth, a fractional hit close to ball to
obtain a 40 final angle, a soft cue stroke so as not to disperse the
three balls, and the right amount of english to control the rebound from
the first rail and land on the second object ball for the count after
contacting two rails. This is another example of "reasoned practice" for
the given play situation.
Theory and practice are complementary, but
theory can never replace practice. Indeed, only practice makes it possible
to progress in the area of consistency of performance. Theory, on the
other hand, has an instructional value : it enables us to understand and
impart to others the variables which a player must address. Both practice
and theory thus combine to form a "reasoned practice" of billiards, and
will continue to fascinate both players and theoreticians.
2. French-English glossary of billiard terms ( Previous / Next Paragraph )
Adhrence pendant le choc : contact without slipping, or momentarily grabbing
Amorti : dead ball
Attaque basse/haute : below-center/above center hit
"Bande-avant" ou "Bricole" : rail-first shot or kick shot
Bande lisse/rugueuse : slippery/sticky cushion, or low/high friction cushion
Bande molle/dure : soft/hard cushion
Billard (table) : table
Billard franais : carom billiards
"Bille colle" : frozen ball
Bille N1, N2 et N3 : cue ball, first object ball and second object ball
"Bosse" ou "Contre" : double kiss (shot where the first object ball rebounds back into the cue ball)
"Butage" : cling or skid
Chevalet : bridge
Choc bille-tapis : ball-cloth collision
"Coul" : follow shot
Coup de queue inclin, faible/moyen/fort : soft/medium/hard cue-elevated stroke
"Coup-dur" : kiss-back shot or double kiss, but only when the first object ball is close to or frozen to the cushion
Dviation initiale/finale : initial/final deflection angle
Effet de ct contraire, par rapport la bande/bille N2 : reverse or inside English
Effet de ct naturel ou "Bon effet", par rapport la bande/bille N2 : running or outside English
"Fausse-queue" : miscue
Force de frottement : friction force
"Glissement pur" : pure sliding
Hauteur d'attaque : height of the cue tip contact point
Limage : warm-up stroke
"Mass" : mass shot
Moment cintique : angular momentum
Moment d'inertie : moment of inertia
Paramtre de pivotement : coefficient of boring friction or z-spin coefficient of friction
Patinage avant/arrire : forward/backward overspin or top-/back-overspin
Percussion : percussion
"Piqu" : piqu shot (mass shot aiming to move back the cue ball)
"Placement" : position play
Point d'appui de la bille : ball-cloth contact point
Point de choc : collision point
Point de vise : aiming point
Principe fondamental de la dynamique : Newton's laws of motion
Procd : cue tip
"Quantit de bille" (plein, 3/4 plein, fin) : fullness of ball hit (full, 3/4-full, fine)
Quantit de mouvement : linear momentum
Queue lgre/massive : light/heavy cue stick
"Queutage" : push shot (foul shot where the cue ball is close to or touching the object ball)
"Rappel" : gather shot
"Rencontre" : time shot (shot where the first object ball pushes the second object ball towards the cue ball)
"Renvers" : reverse-the-corner shot or double-the-rail shot
"Repre" : diamond
Rsistance l'avancement : rolling resistance
"Rtro" : draw shot
Roulement : rolling without slipping
Saut : jump shot
Spcialits (partie libre, jeu de cadre, jeu par 1 bande, par 3 bandes, billard artistique) : disciplines (straight rail, balkaline, one-cushion, three-cushion, artistic billiards)
Tapis : cloth
Vitesse de glissement : relative surface velocity
Vitesse de translation/rotation : translational/rotational velocity
3. Results from the mechanics of collisions as applied to billiards ( Previous / Next Paragraph )
The general equations which model a collision
between two arbitrary bodies, taking into account elasticity and the
friction between the bodies during the collision, are discussed below.
Notation
C, WC : point of collision between bodies, and surface velocity of C relative to body 1
G, M : center of gravity and mass of body 1
I, R : moment of inertia about the central axis of body 1, and radius of body 1 (for a spherical and homogeneous body I = (2/5) M R2 )
P : percussion vector exerted at C by body 2
Q : kinetic energy of the two body system
x* : unit vector, normal to the tangent plane through C and directed toward the interior of body 1
W, Ω : translational velocity vector and angular velocity vector of body 1
' : index signifying body 2
a, i : indices signifying the instants immediately preceding and immediately after collision
fi, N : coefficients of friction and elasticity between the two bodies
e : percentage of kinetic energy lost during the collision
v1.v2 and v1 x v2 : scalar product and vector product of the two vectors v1 and v2, particularly : v1 x v1 = 0
mixed product : (v1 x v2).v3 = (v2 x v3).v1
double vector product : v1 x (v2 x v3) = (v1.v3) v2 - (v1.v2) v3
||v1|| : norm of vector v1, such that ||v1||2 = v1.v1
Equations and results
The standard laws of the mechanics of collisions may be written :
Conservation of linear momentum :
M Wi = M Wa + P
M' W'i = M' W'a + (-P)
where vectors Wi and W'i are to be determined.
Conservation of angular momentum
I Ωi = I Ωa + GC x P
I' Ω'i = I' Ω'a + G'C x (-P)
where vectors Ωi and Ω'i are to be determined.
Coulomb's law of friction :
P = P* (x* - fi WCa / ||WCa||)
P* = k M (W'a - Wa).x*
WCa = (Wa - W'a) - [(Wa - W'a).x*] x* + x* x (R Ωa + R' Ω'a)
where the constant k is to be determined.
Newton's law of collisions for homogeneous and spherical spheres :
(Wi - W'i).x* = - N (Wa - W'a).x*
with N constant.
Theorem of kinetic energy
Qa - Qi = e Qa
where e is not constant (if N is constant).
Q = (1/2) (M W2 + I Ω2 + M' W'2 + I' Ω'2)
There are thus 5 equations for 5 unknowns (Wi, Ωi, W'i, Ω'i, k). Vectorial resolution yields the unique solution
(equations 1a) :
Wi = Wa + (P*/M) (x* - fi WCa / ||WCa||)
Ωi = Ωa + (5/ 2R) fi (P*/M) x* x WCa / ||WCa||
W'i = W'a + (M/M') (Wa - Wi)
Ω'i = Ω'a - (M/M') (R/R') (Ωa - Ωi)
k = (1 + N)/(1 + M/M')
We may also deduce that :
Wi.x* = k W'a.x* + (1 - k) Wa.x*
W'i.x* = (k M/M') Wa.x* + (1 - k M/M') W'a.x*
WCi = u WCa
where u = 1 - (7/2) fi (1 + M/M') (P*/M) / ||WCa||
e (1 + M/M') = (1 - N2) (1/2) M [ (W'a - Wa).x* ) ]2 / Qa, when fi is negligible.
Discussion
1- For a ball-cloth collision in which the ball
rebounds from the cloth after jumping in the air, these equations are
exact.
2- For the case of a ball-ball collision, the
equations projected horizontally on the cloth are exact, provided we may
ignore the influence of the horizontal percussion arising from
the cloth. In the vertical dimension, the slow translational velocity of
each ball is destroyed by the resistance of the cloth (when the ball is
forced into the cloth) or is made insensitive by the weight of the ball
which immediately brings it back against the cloth when the ball jumps
in the air. The equations are almost exact if we ignore the vertical
speed of translation of each ball (components Wi.z and W'i.z).
If we consider a perfectly elastic collision
between two balls of the same mass ( N = 1, M = M'), then a collision
assumed to take place without friction (fi = 0) results only in an
exchange of velocity normal to the point of collision between balls ;
under the same conditions, a collision with a stationary ball (W'a = 0)
makes the moving ball rebound along a line tangent to the point of
collision, even in the presence of friction.
3- The case of a ball-rail collision is similar
to that of the collision between balls, setting W'a = Ω'a = (M/M') = 0.
4- In the general case where the cloth is
sufficiently compressible so that the various simple collisions which
occur (ball-ball, ball-rail and ball-cloth) may be considered
sequential, the equations are exact.
5- In the four preceding cases, if the relative
motion between the two bodies is not sufficient to overcome
friction (u < 0), there is adherence during the collision and the
equations must be modified by replacing the quantity fi (P*/M)/||WCa||
by the quantity (2/7)/(1 + M/M'), which gives (equations 1b) :
Wi = Wa + (P*/M) x* - (2/7) WCa/(1 + M/M')
Ωi = Ωa + (5/7R) [x* x WCa/(1 + M/M')]
W'i = W'a + (M/M') (Wa - Wi)
Ω'i = Ω'a - (M/M') (R/R') (Ωa - Ωi)
k = (1 + N)/(1 + M/M')
These equations also include the ideal case
of body 1 rolling without slipping on body 2 immediately before the
collision (WCa = 0).
6- Suppose that, just before the collision
between the two bodies, body 2 is stationary (W'a = Ω'a = 0), and body
1's kinetic energy of rotation is small (Ωa is negligible). If the
collision is nearly head-on (Wa // x*) and friction is small (fi
negligible), then the coefficients e and N are related, to a first
approximation, by :
e = (1 - N2)/(1 + M/M')
7- The case of a horizontal cue stick-cue ball
collision is special : the cue stick simultaneously strikes the ball and
the hand posed on the cloth. To model this collision, the percussion vector
(P) is almost parallel with the axis of the cue stick
(P // W'a and Ω'i = 0), with the proportion of kinetic energy
dissipated in the collision remaining almost constant. If D indicates
the offset of the cue with respect to the center of the ball, vectorial
resolution yields the unique solution (equations 1c) :
Wi = W'a [1 + (1 - e - e K2 M'/M)1/2] / [K2 + M/M']
Ωi = (5/ 2R) (GC/R) x Wi
W'i = W'a - (M/M') Wi
K2 = 1 + (5/2) (D/R)2
8- The case of a ball-cue collision in which the
cue stroke is inclined with respect to the plane of the cloth is similar
to the case of the horizontal cue stick-cue ball collision. If for
simplicity we suppose that the cloth is sufficiently compressible to be
able to time sequence the two simple collisions which occur (the ball-cue
stick collision and the ball-cloth collision), we may replace the terms Wa
and Ωa in equations 1a, respectively, by the terms Wi and Ωi given by
equations 1c.
4. Results from the dynamics of moving balls as applied to billiards ( Previous / Next Paragraph )
The generalized equations which govern a ball's motion immediately after the collision which caused the motion are given below.
Complementary Notation
E, WE : position of the ball on the cloth, and relative surface velocity vector at E
F, K : reaction force, and the frictional torque of the cloth on the ball
z : vertical unit vector, directed upward
c : index relating to the instant when the ball rolls without slipping on the cloth
dv/dt : time derivative of vector v
f, fc, fz : coefficient of friction, coefficient of rolling resistance, and z-spin friction parameter between the ball and cloth
g, t : acceleration of gravity, and time
Equations and results
The standard laws of the mechanics of a ball in motion may be written :
Newton's law of motion :
M dW/dt = F - M g z
I dΩ/dt = GE x F + K
with vectors W, Ω and F to be determined.
Particular scenarios :
1. Jumped ball
F = 0 and K = 0
2. Ball sliding on the cloth (Coulomb's Law of friction)
E immediately below G (ignoring rolling resistance compared to friction)
F = M g (z - f WE / ||WE||)
with WE = W + z x (R Ω)
K horizontal is negligible compared to GE x F
K vertical = - (fz / R) (M g R) (Ω vertical) / ||Ω vertical||
3. Ball rolling without slipping on the cloth
W = - z x (R Ω)
K horizontal = 0
K vertical = - (fz / R) (M g R) (Ω vertical) / ||Ω vertical||
There are thus 3 equations for 3 unknowns (W, Ω and F). Vectorial resolution yields a unique solution (equations 2a) :
1. Jumped ball
W = Wi - g t z and Ω = Ωi
2. Ball sliding on the cloth (for t < tc)
W = Wi - (t/tc) (Wi - Wc)
Ω horizontal = Ωi horizontal + (5/ 2R) (t/tc) z x (Wi - Wc)
Ω vertical = Ωi vertical [1 - (5/ 2R) (fz / R) (g / ||Ωi vertical||) t]
tc = ||Wi - Wc||/(f g)
Wc = (5/7) [Wi - (2 R/5) z x Ωi ]
Ωc horizontal = (1/R) z x Wc = (5/7) [(1/R) z x Wi + (2/5) Ωi horizontal]
F = M g (z - f WEi / ||WEi||), which indicates that the force F remains constant during the entire sliding motion
3. Ball rolling without slipping on the cloth (for t > tc)
W = Wc [1 - fc (g / ||Wc||) (t - tc)]
Ω horizontal = (1/R) z x W
Ω vertical = Ωi vertical [ 1 - (5/ 2R) (fz / R) (g / ||Ωi vertical||) t ]
F = M g (z - fc Wc / ||Wc||), which indicates that the force F remains constant during the entire rolling motion
In each case, one may integrate the equations for W and Ω to obtain the trajectory and the rotation of the ball.
Discussion
If the ball jumps in the air immediately
after the collision, its trajectory is a parabola in a vertical plane.
If the ball remains in contact with the
cloth, it starts its motion by slipping in a horizontal plane in a
parabolic arc, then rolls without slipping in a straight line.
5. Synthesis of a theory of billiards ( Previous / Next Paragraph )
The complete synthesis of the theory of
billiards, including the justification for the assertions made in this
article, may be found in the French book "Billiards - Theory of Play" by Regis Petit (see References).
6. References ( Previous / Next Paragraph )
CORIOLIS G.G., Thorie mathmatique des effets du jeu de billard, Jacques Gabay, 1990 (rimpression du livre original, 1835).
CORIOLIS G.G., Thorie mathmatique des effets du jeu de billard (Fig. 1-68 mal scannrises), Carilian-Goeury, Paris, 1835. Exemplaire du "Berkeley University of California".
CORIOLIS G.G., Thorie mathmatique des effets du jeu de billard (Fig. 1-68 mal scannrises), Carilian-Goeury, Paris, 1835. Exemplaire du "Stanford University of California".
CORIOLIS G.G., Errata n2 par PETIT R. (.xls, 40 Ko)
CORIOLIS G.G., Mathematical Theory of Spin, Friction, and Collision in the Game of Billiards, English translation by D. Nadler, 2005.
KOEHLER J.H., The Science of Pocket Billiards, Sportology Publications, 1995.
MARLOW W.C., The Physics of Pocket Billiards, Marlow Advanced Systems Technologies (MAST), 1995.
PEREZ J.P., Mcanique : points matriels - solides - fluides, Masson, 1995.
PETIT R., Billard - Thorie du jeu, Chiron, 1996, 2004.
RUGERE R., Trait de billard, Leymarie, 1988.
SHEPARD R., Amateur Physics for the Amateur Pool Player (APAPP), 1997.
Regis Petit is computing engineer of the company "Electricit de France" (EDF).
7. Proof of results ( Previous / Start Paragraph )
7.1. Ball-ball, ball-cushion or ball-cloth collision ( Start / Next Subparagraph )
Basic equations :
Index ' is relative to the collided body (ball 2, cushion or cloth).
(C1) M Wi = M Wa + P
(C2) M' W'i = M' W'a + (-P)
(C3) I Ωi = I Ωa + GC x P
(C4) I' Ω'i = I' Ω'a + G'C x (-P)
with : I = (2/5) M R2 and I' = (2/5) M' R'2
(C5) (Wi - W'i).x* = - N (Wa - W'a).x*
(C6) P = P* ( x* - fi WCa / ||WCa||)
(C6') WCa = (Wa - W'a) - [ (Wa - W'a).x* ] x* + x* x (R Ωa + R' Ω'a)
(C6") P* = k M (W'a - Wa).x*
Solution :
Equations (C1) and (C2) give W'i as follows :
(C7) W'i = W'a + (M/M') (Wa - Wi)
Equations (C3) and (C4) give Ω'i as follows :
(C8) Ω'i = Ω'a - (M/M') (R/R') (Ωa - Ωi)
Equations (C1), (C6) and (C6") give Wi as follows :
(C10) Wi = Wa + (P*/M) (x* - fi WCa / ||WCa||)
Equations (C3), (C6) and (C6") give Ωi as follows :
(C11) Ωi = Ωa + (5/2)(1/R) x* x (Wa - Wi) = Ωa + (5/2)(1/R) fi (P*/M) x* x WCa / ||WCa||
Replacing of (C7) in (C5) gives Wi as follows :
(Wi - Wa).x* = ((1 + N)/(1 + M/M')) (W'a - Wa).x*
Replacing of (C10) in this last equation gives the coefficient k as follows :
(C9) k = (1 + N)/(1 + M/M')
It also shows that :
(C12) WCi = (Wi - W'i) - [ (Wi - W'i).x* ] x* + x* x (R Ωi + R' Ω'i) = u WCa
The adherence case during the collision is special. It occurs when the relative motion between the two bodies is not sufficient to overcome friction, which is written :
(C13) WCi = 0
Replacing of (C13) in (C12) gives the adherence condition as follows :
u < 0 which includes the case WCa = 0
Equations (C7)(C8)(C10)(C11) must be modified by replacing the quantity fi (P*/M)/||WCa|| by the quantity (2/7)/(1 + M/M')
7.2. Cue-ball collision ( Previous / Next Subparagraph )
Basic equations :
Index ' is relative to the cue.
(C21) M Wi = M Wa + P
(C22) M' W'i = M' W'a + (-P)
(C23) I Ωi = I Ωa + GC x P
with : I = (2/5) M R2
(C24) Qa - Qi = e Qa
(C24') Q = (1/2) (M W 2 + I Ω2 + M' W'2 + I' Ω'2)
Assumptions :
- The ball is at rest just before collision :
(C25) Wa = Ωa = 0
- The cue movement just before collision is a translation :
(C26) Ω'a = 0
- The cue collides the ball at point C : GC = - R x* and we define the following coefficient : K2 = 1 + (5/2) (D/R)2
- The hand or bridge guiding the cue completely absorbs the transversal shock wave :
(C27) P is parallel to W'a
(C28) Ω'i = 0
- The offset (D) of the cue is not too large so that the cue and the ball automatically split just after collision :
(C29) Wi.x* > W'i.x*
Solution :
Equations (C21) and (C25) give W'i as follows :
W'i = W'a - (M/M') Wi
Equations (C23), (C25) and (C2) give Ωi as follows :
Ωi = (5/2)(1/R) (GC/R) x Wi
Equations (C24')(C25)(C26) and (C28) give Qa and Qi as follows :
Qa = (1/2) M' W'a2
Qi = (1/2) (M Wi2 + I Ωi2 + M' W'i2 )
Equations (C23) and (C25) give Ωi2 as follows :
Ωi2 = ((5/2)(D/R)(1/R))2 Wi2
Equations (C24)(C27) and (C29) give Wi as follows :
Wi = W'a [1 + Square_root of (1 - e - e K2 M'/M)] / [K2 + M/M']
The condition of automatic cue-ball splitting can be written as follows :
(D/R)2 < (2/5)(1 + M/M')(1 - e (1 + M'/M))
7.3. Sliding movement : Ω horizontal, Wc, tc, W and WE ( Previous / Next Subparagraph )
Basic equations :
(M1) M dW/dt = F - M g z
(M2) I dΩ/dt = GE x F + K
with : I = (2/5) M R2
(M3) F = M g [ z - (f WE / ||WE||) ]
(M4) WE = W + z x R Ω = W + z x R Ω horizontal
Assumptions :
- The ball remains in contact with the cloth at the beginning and during the sliding period : Wi = Wi - (Wi.z) z and W.z = 0
- The rolling resistance is negligible compared to the friction force : GE = - R z
- The term K horizontal is negligible compared to the product GE x F : K horizontal = 0
Solution :
Equations (M1) and (M3) give dW/dt as follows :
(M1') dW/dt = - f g WE / ||WE||
Equations (M2) and (M3) give dΩ horizontal /dt as follows :
(M2") dΩ horizontal /dt = - (5/2) (1/R) z x (F / M) = - (5/2) (1/R) z x dW/dt
Equations (M4) and (M2") give dWE/dt as follows :
dWE/dt = dW/dt + z x R dΩ/dt = dW/dt + z x R dΩ horizontal /dt = dW/dt - (5/2) z x (z x dW/dt) = (7/2) dW/dt
From Equation (M1') we deduce that dWE/dt is parallel to WE.
WE keeps a constant direction during the movement and WE can be written as follows :
(M3') WE / ||WE|| = WEi / ||WEi||
From Equation (M3) F can be written as follows :
(M3") F = M g [ z - (f WEi / ||WEi||) ]
Then F keeps a constant amplitude and direction during the movement.
Integrating of Equation (M2") gives Ω horizontal as follows :
(M2''') Ω horizontal - Ωi horizontal = - (5/2) (1/R) z x (W - Wi)
From Equation (M4) WE can be written as follows :
(M4') WE - WEi = (W - Wi) + z x R (Ω horizontal - Ωi horizontal) = (W - Wi) - (5/2) z x (z x (W - Wi)) = (7/2) (W - Wi)
At the end of sliding period WE = 0 when W = Wc. Then Wc can be written as follows :
(M8) Wc = Wi - (2/7) WEi = (5/7) (Wi - (2/5) R z x Ωi)
From Equations (M3') and (M8) integrating of (M1') gives W as follows :
W - Wi = - f g t (Wi - Wc) / ||Wi - Wc||
At the end of sliding period t = tc when W = Wc. Then W and tc can be written as follows :
(M10) W = Wi - (t/tc) (Wi - Wc)
(M10') tc = ||Wi - Wc|| / (f g)
From Equations (M4') and (M8) WE can be written as follows :
WE = (7/2) (1 - (t/tc)) (Wi - Wc) = (1 - (t/tc)) WEi
7.4. Rolling movement without sliding : W, t translation_stop and Ω horizontal ( Previous / Next Subparagraph )
Basic equations :
(M1) M dW/dt = F - M g z
(M2) I dΩ/dt = GE x F + K
with :
I = (2/5) M R2
(M5) Point E is shifted to the front of the ball at an angle (#) : cos[#] = - (1/R) GE.z and we define the following coefficient : fc = sin[#] / (2/5 + cos[#])
(M6) W = - z x R Ω
Assumptions :
- The ball remains in contact with the cloth at the beginning and during the rolling period : W.z = 0
- The term K horizontal is negligible compared to the product GE x F : K horizontal = 0
Solution :
Equations (M2) and (M6) give dW/dt as follows :
dW/dt = - z x R dΩ/dt = - (R/I) z x (GE x F) = - (R/I) ( (F.z) GE - (GE.z) F )
Equation (M1) gives then dW/dt as follows :
dW/dt = - (R/I) ( M g GE - (GE.z) (M g z + M dW/dt) )
Then :
(M11) dW/dt = - g (GE - (GE.z) z) / ((2/5) R - (GE.z)) = - g (R sin[#] W / ||W||) / ((2/5) R + R cos[#]) = - g fc W / ||W||
We deduce that dW/dt is parallel to W.
Then W keeps a constant direction during the movement and W can be written as follows :
(M11') W / ||W|| = Wc / ||Wc||
From Equation (M1) F can be written as follows :
(M11") F = M g [ z - (fc Wc / ||Wc||) ]
F keeps a constant amplitude and direction during the movement. The coefficient fc reflects the rolling resistance on the cloth.
Integrating of Equation (M11) gives W as follows :
(M12) When t > t translation_stop : W = 0
(M12') When t < t translation_stop : W = (1 - (t - tc)/(t translation_stop - tc)) Wc
(M12") t translation_stop = tc + ||Wc||/(fc g)
Equation (M6) gives then Ω horizontal as follows :
(1/R) z x W = - (1/R) z x (z x R Ω) = Ω - (Ω.z) z = Ω horizontal
7.5. z-spin vector when sliding or rolling : Ω vertical and t spin_stop ( Previous / Next Subparagraph )
Basic equations :
(M1) M dW/dt = F - M g z
(M2) I dΩ/dt = GE x F + K
with :
I = (2/5) M R2
(M7) K vertical = - (fz / R) (M g R) Ω vertical / ||Ω vertical||
Solution :
Equations (M3") and (M11") give the following equations :
For the sliding period : (z x GE).(F/(M g)) = ( z x (-R) z ).(F/(M g)) = 0
For the rolling period : (z x GE).(F/(M g)) = ( z x R (sin[#] (W/||W||) - cos[#] z) ).(F/(M g)) = R sin[#] ( z x (W/||W||) ).( z - fc (W/||W||) ) = 0
Equation (M2) can be written :
(M13) I dΩ vertical/dt = ((GE x F).z) z + K vertical = (z x GE).F + K vertical = K vertical = - (fz / R) (M g R) Ω vertical / ||Ω vertical||
We deduce that dΩ vertical/dt is parallel to Ω vertical.
Ω vertical keeps a constant direction during the movement and Ω vertical can be written :
(M13') Ω vertical / ||Ω vertical|| = Ωi vertical / ||Ωi vertical||
Integrating of Equation (M13) gives Ω vertical as follows :
(M14) When t > t spin_stop : Ω vertical = 0
(M14') When t < t spin_stop : Ω vertical = (1 - (t / t spin_stop)) Ωi vertical
(M14") t spin_stop = (2/5) R2 ||Ωi vertical||/(fz g)
7.6. Horizontal cue stroke : sliding distances y, yb and yc ( Previous / Start Subparagraph )
The different vectors projected in the cue reference {x, y, z} can be written as follows :
W = (0, V, 0)
Wi = (0, Vi, 0)
Wc = (0, Vc, 0)
Ω = (p, 0, r)
Ωi = (pi, 0, ri)
z = (0, 0, 1)
Equations (M2''') (M8) (M10') and (M10) can be written more simply :
p = pi - (5/2) (1/R) (Vi - V)
Vc = (5/7) (Vi - (2/5) R pi)
V = Vi - (t/tc) (Vi - Vc)
tc = |Vi - Vc| / (f g)
If H is the height of the cue tip contact point, the cue-ball collision gives the following equation for any english :
pi = (5/2) (1/R) Vi (1 - (H/R))
Then :
p = (5/2) (1/R) (V - (H/R) Vi)
Vi - Vc = Vi (1 - (5/7)(H/R))
V = Vi - s f g t
s = Sign of [1 - (5/7)(H/R)]
Integrating of the last equation gives the distance (y) at any time (t) during the sliding period as follows :
y = Vi t - (1/2) s f g t2 = s (Vi2 - V2) / (2 f g)
The sliding is pure for p = 0, then : Vb = (H/R) Vi
The sliding stops for p = - (1/R) Vc, then : Vc = (5/7) (H/R) Vi
Consequently the distances yb (until pure sliding point) and yc (until sliding breakpoint) can be written :
For H < R : yb = Vi2 (1 - (H/R)2) / (2 f g)
For any H : yc = Vi2 |1 - ((5/7)(H/R))2| / (2 f g)
Copyright 2005 Rgis Petit.
Last page update : December 29, 2023.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/the_carbon_fiber_shaft_craze.pdf
title: The Carbon Fiber Shaft Craze
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“The Carbon Fiber Shaft Craze”                                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference
numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    This is my 15-year anniversary issue as a BD columnist, and I am very happy to still be writing for this
great magazine. When I first started writing, I had a list of about 20 ideas for things I wanted to write about.
Now, my list of future topics has grown to over 100. The more I write, the more I come up with topics that I
think might interesting. This helps keep it fun and exciting, constantly re-prioritizing what I want to do next.

    This month, I want to summarize results of some carbon fiber shaft testing I did recently in online video
NV J.12. The video talks about how to select a cue, and demonstrates how to do simple squirt testing to
compare shaft cue ball (CB) deflections. It also looks at the advantages of carbon fiber shafts, and compares
the popular Predator Revo to the new Cuetec 15K.

     I often get asked how to select a cue. First of all, it really doesn’t matter that much. A different cue will
not make you a better player, and any good player can learn to adjust to and play well with any cue
(assuming it has a tip that holds chalk). If you care how a cue looks, just get one that looks good to you. And
if you care how the hit of a cue sounds or feels, get one that sounds and feels good. If you are like me and do
not really care about these things, the only performance measure that really matters is the amount of CB
deflection (AKA squirt). The most important advice concerning cues is to stick with one and spend time
getting used to it. Don't keep changing equipment thinking a new or different cue will make you a better
player. That is not the case … “it’s the Indian, not the arrow.” For more info and advice concerning how to
select or purchase a cue, see “selecting a cue” in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.

    Diagram 1 shows a very simple way to compare the amount of CB deflection (squirt) different cues or
shafts create. I am aiming the center of the CB at the center of an object ball (OB) on the rail. I am using
close to maximum sidespin with every shot, and I am using “parallel english,” where I first aim center-ball and
then shift the cue sideways to apply the sidespin, keeping the cue parallel to the aiming line. When doing
squirt testing it is best to use fast speed to minimize the effects of swerve, which varies with spin amount, shot
speed and distance, cloth conditions, and amount of cue elevation. For more information, see “squirt and
swerve effects” in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu. In the video, I test a 12.4 Predator Revo, the
new Cuetec CT-15K, a Predator Z-2, and a Players cue with a typical solid maple shaft with a large ferrule.
Even the lowest deflection shafts create CB deflection. As shown in Diagram 1, the Z-2 CB deflection or
squirt is about the same as the Revo, the Cuetec deflects more, and the Players even more.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      January, 2019
                           Diagram 1 CB Deflection Comparison at Fast Speed

      Obviously, it is possible to adjust your aim when using sidespin so the CB heads in the desired direction.
(If this were not possible, nobody would be able to play this game at a high level). One method to do this is to
the use the new back-hand english (BHE) / front-hand english (FHE) calibration system described and
demonstrated online video NV J.9 and in the BHE/FHE Calibration Document linked in the video description.
This system works with any bridge length and any cue you want, and can be applied to shots of different
speeds and distances. I use the BHE/FHE method in NV J.12. For the long, medium-speed shot in the
video, using my normal bridge length of about 12”, the Revo and Z-2 required 70% BHE and 30% FHE, the
Cuetec required 90% BHE and 10% FHE, and the Players required 100% BHE.

     A more accurate way to test a shaft for CB deflection and compare it to others is to measure the shaft’s
“natural pivot length.” A good way to do this is to set up a short-to-medium distance shot straight into a
pocket as shown in Diagram 2, with two blocker balls that allow the CB to barely pass into the pocket. With
an accurate hit, the CB will enter the pocket without disturbing the balls. If the bridge length is just the right
distance, 100% pure BHE will automatically cancel squirt and send the CB in the desired direction. This
bridge length is called the “natural pivot length” of the shaft. As before, for an accurate measurement, you
need to use fast speed so the CB will not have time to swerve. You can use any amount of sidespin, but the
test is more accurate if you use close to maximum sidespin.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      January, 2019
                              Diagram 2 Pivoted Aim for Squirt Compensation

     As shown in Diagram 3, the bridge or pivot length is the distance between the front of the CB and the
pivot point on the bridge hand. When the bridge length is too short, BHE over compensates for squirt, so with
right sidespin, the CB will go too far to the shooter’s right. If this happens during the test, increase the bridge
length. And if the bridge length is too long, the BHE pivot will not compensate the aim enough, causing the
CB to go too far to the shooter’s left. In that case, decrease the bridge length. Diagram 2 shows the bridge
length corresponding to the “natural pivot length” for the Cuetec shaft. Look how much the aim must be
adjusted (the red line) to compensate for squirt.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      January, 2019
                                                Diagram 3 Bridge (Pivot) Length

    As summarized in Table 1, the Players cue has a typical amount of CB deflection with a natural pivot
length of 9.5”, the Cuetec has lower CB deflection with the pivot at 13”, and the Revo and Z-2 have even
lower CB deflection, with the pivot at 19”. I played with the Z-2 for many years, so I was glad when I found
out the Revo, which I play with now, had the same CB deflection. Because of this, I did not need to make any
changes in the way I compensate aim when using sidespin.

                                     Table 1 Shaft Natural Pivot Length Comparison

                                                Shaft           Natural Pivot Length
                                         Predator 12.4 Revo         19” (48 cm)
                                            Predator Z-2            19” (48 cm)
                                           Cuetec CT-15K            13” (33 cm)
                                         Players Solid Maple        9.5” (24 cm)

     Now, I’ll share my observations concerning carbon fiber shafts. They can "feel" and sound very different
(due to stiffness), but does a carbon fiber shaft offer any real performance differences? First of all, LD shafts
(carbon fiber or maple), cannot get more spin than other shafts like some people think. Although, LD shafts
do not need as much aim compensation when using sidespin, so there is slightly less chance for error. The
stiffness of a carbon fiber shaft can result in a slightly more efficient hit, especially with a hard tip. With a
more efficient hit, slightly less stroke speed is required to get the same CB speed. But this is not a big effect,
and it is something a player can easily adjust to after a few shots. To me, the only true advantages of a CF
shaft are:

          •        It is smooth and has very little friction, especially with an open bridge.

          •        It stays cleaner than a wood shaft, which can be difficult to keep sealed, clean, and smooth (with
                   no scratches or dings).

          •        It is easy and safe to clean with a damp towel.

          •        It doesn't warp even under humidity and temperature extremes (so you can leave it in the trunk of
                   your car in any weather).

          •        It doesn't scratch easily.

          •        It doesn't ding when you hit balls, bang up against furniture, or drop it on a hard and dirty floor.

Billiards Digest                                                                                              January, 2019
     I certainly like the Revo that I have been playing with. I don’t think it makes me play any better, but it has
all of the advantages just listed, and it requires much less care. As with the Cuetec, it should stay clean,
smooth, and straight for a long time to come. Comparing the popular Predator Revo carbon fiber shaft to the
new Ceutec CT-15K, they both have a long straight taper, making any kind of hand bridge comfortable. The
Cuetec hit feels a little softer and less stiff to me compared to the Revo, but this will depend some on the tip
you use. The white ferrule will be familiar to people and might help some people better visualize the shaft end
which might make it easier to visualize cue alignment and tip position at the CB. The Cuetec has more CB
deflection than the Revo, but some people will prefer this since it might be closer to what they are used to.
But if you use my new BHE/FHE calibration method, you should be able to aim equally well with any cue and
any bridge length. Regardless of which carbon fiber shaft you might choose, remember:

                                       Once you go black, you won’t go back!

When I used this phrase in the video, it did not occur to me that some people might read racial and sexual
connotations into the words (as was pointed out to me by comments on the Internet). FYI, that was not my
intention, and I hope it did or does not offend anyone. I just think it is a cool phrase applied to carbon fiber
shafts (which are black). That’s it.

    I hope you learned something about how to test shafts, and I hope you now know more about why the
carbon fiber shaft craze is probably here to stay. I also hope you look forward to another 15 years of articles
from Dr. Dave. I sure look forward to writing them.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.12 – How to Select a Pool Cue, Cue Ball Deflection, Carbon Fiber, Revo vs. Cuetec
normal video        NV J.9 – "Got English?" – How to Aim Using Sidespin, With Game-Situation Examples

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      January, 2019
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/the_french_fryin_legion_s_new_secret_weapon.pdf
title: The French Fryin Legion S New Secret Weapon
topics: uncategorized
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
[NO_EXTRACTED_TEXT]
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/the_lag_shot.pdf
title: The Lag Shot
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“The Lag Shot”                                                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and technical proofs (TP),
and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference
numbers used in my articles will help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or
inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details
can be found online at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

    The topic for this article is the lag shot, which is used to determine who breaks first. Lag shots aren’t
typically used in league play; but they are often used in tournaments. The winner of the lag has a big
advantage in being awarded the first break, especially in a winner-breaks event. Even in alternating-break
format, the lag shot can be the determining factor of the match if it goes hill-hill and the winner of the lag gets
to break for the deciding game.

     Last month, we looked at recommended tip contact-point heights for different situations and indicated that
the optimal height for consistent speed/distance control is 0.2R, as illustrated in Diagram 1. This is the best
tip height to target when shooting a lag shot. Diagram 2 shows why. The graph, which is from the math and
physics analysis in TP B.12, shows how cue ball (CB) travel distance varies with tip height, for a given cue
speed. With a center-ball hit (point “A”), the cue moves the CB forward initially with the most speed, but the
CB slows as it slides (drags) across the cloth and develops forward roll. With a maximum above-center hit
(point “C”), at the miscue limit (0.5R), the CB doesn’t require drag to develop roll, but the forward speed of the
ball is much less due to the off-center hit, thus the CB travels a much shorter distance with the same cue
speed as with the center-ball hit. At close to 0.2R (point “B”), the CB starts with slightly less speed than a
center-ball hit, but also starts with some topspin, so not as much speed is lost as forward roll develops. As a
result, the CB travels farther (about 11 feet for point “B” compared to about 9.5 feet for point “A” and about 7
feet for point “C”) Therefore, for the longest CB travel distance with a given cue speed, make contact at the
0.2R height.

     Not only does the 0.2R tip height result in the maximum CB travel distance, more importantly for the
subject of this article, it also provides the best distance consistency given unintended variances in tip height.
This is illustrated by the green and purple range bars in the diagram. The horizontal (green) bars show
identical tip height changes at each target height, and the vertical (purple) bars show the resulting changes in
CB travel distances. At 0.2R (point “B”), the tip height change makes very little difference in the travel
distance (see the short purple bar), but at 0.0R (point “A”) and 0.5R (point “C”), the change in CB travel
distance is about a foot! The obvious moral of this story is: if you aim the tip at the 0.2R height with a given
cue speed, even if actual contact is a little lower or higher than intended, its travel distance will not be much
different than expected. Aiming at other heights will result in less consistency.

                                                                              R
                                                                  0.5R
                                                         0.2R     miscue     ball
                                                                   limit   radius

                                      Diagram 1 Optimal lag tip height

Billiards Digest                                                                                      October, 2011
                                              11
                                                                   B

                                              10

                    CB travel distance (ft)
                                                     A
                                              9

                                              8

                                              7
                                                                                                          C

                                              6
                                                  0.0R   0.1R          0.2R        0.3R            0.4R   0.5R

                                                            tip contact point offset from center

                    Diagram 2 CB travel distance vs. tip height for a given cue speed

     Diagram 3 illustrates some additional advice concerning the lag shot. Diagram 1a shows the range of lag
shot positions you might expect if you attempt to leave the CB just short of the cushion. Sometimes, you will
reach the cushion (see the red position marked “long”), and sometimes you will come up well short (see the
blue position). Most times, you will fall somewhere else in the “expected range” (see the purple bar). The
average of all these possible outcomes is shown as the ghost ball in the center of the range. Compare this
with Diagram 1b, which shows what happens if your average position is against the cushion instead. With
speed inconsistencies similar to that in Diagram 1a, the shortest position will be short by the same amount.
However, the distance to the long position will be less because, as demonstrated in HSV B.15, when the CB
rebounds off a cushion, it typically loses about half of its speed. Therefore, a ball going long off the cushion
will come out about half as far as a ball left short with a comparable speed difference from the average. Thus,
the expected range of positions will be smaller. Diagram 1c shows an even better situation. If your average
speed has the CB rebounding off the cushion by a small amount, both the shortest and longest positions will
then be closer to the cushion as a result of the rebound speed-loss effect. The moral of this story is also
apparent: you should always strive to try to bounce the CB off the cushion. On average, your final position
will be better than if you didn’t.

Billiards Digest                                                                                                 October, 2011
                      long average short

                        expected range        a.) aiming short of the cushion

                                           b.) aiming to just reach the cushion

                                           c.) aiming to rebound off the cushion

                                            Diagram 3 Lag cushion effect

                    TP B.12 - Optimal tip height for speed/distance control
technical proof

                    HSV B.15 – Straight-on kick shot rebound losses and spin changes for roll, stun,
high-speed video       and draw shots

     I hope this article gives you a new appreciation for the lag shot. In summary, the recommendations are:
hit the CB slightly above center (at 0.2R), and use enough speed to rebound off the cushion. If you aren’t
doing this already, try it out and see if your results improve. As mentioned at the beginning of the article,
even a slight edge with the lag shot can make a big difference, possibly being the deciding factor in the
outcome of a match or tournament.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •      I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
             familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
             please refer to the online glossary on my website.
      •      I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help find errors
             and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts. Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD: “High-speed
Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                       October, 2011
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/the_physics_of_billiards.html
title: The Physics Of Billiards
topics: collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
Physics Of Billiards
The Physics Of Billiards
Source: http://www.flickr.com/photos/ventsislav/2222807833
Physics Of Billiards – Ball Collision
The physics behind billiards (or the physics behind pool), in large part, involves collisions between billiard balls. When two billiard balls collide the collision is nearly elastic. An elastic collision is one in which the kinetic energy of the system is conserved before and after impact. Therefore, for simplicity one can assume that for collisions involving billiard balls, the collision is perfectly elastic.
For collisions between balls, momentum is always conserved (just like in any other collision). For a simplified case assuming no friction (discussed below), we can combine this fact with the elastic-collision assumption to find the trajectory of two colliding billiard balls after impact. The figure below shows a collision between two billiard balls. For the general case, the collision is not head on, which is what the figure shows.
It is assumed that balls A and B have the same mass and that ball B is initially at rest (zero velocity). The initial velocity of ball A is V1A. After impact, ball A moves at velocity V2A in the direction shown, and ball B moves at velocity V2B in the direction shown.
The line L1 is drawn at a tangent to both balls at the point of contact. Due to geometry, L1 is perpendicular to the line passing through the center of the two balls and the contact point CP. Due to geometry, L1 also makes an angle θ with the vertical, and the line passing through the center of the balls makes an angle θ with the horizontal.
After impact at CP, ball B moves in the direction of the line joining the center of the two balls, as shown. This is because the force (impulse) delivered by ball A to ball B acts normal to the surface of ball B, assuming there is no friction between the balls (a good assumption since billiard balls are smooth). Thus, ball B moves in the direction of this impulse.
Notice that, after impact, ball A moves in a direction perpendicular to the direction of ball B. This interesting result can be proven as follows.
Analysis Of Ball Collision
For the two colliding balls, the general vector equation for conservation of linear momentum is:
Since the masses mA and mB are assumed equal, this equation simplifies to:
For an elastic collision kinetic energy is conserved, and the equation is:
Since the masses mA and mB are equal, this equation simplifies to:
By the Pythagorean theorem, this last equation tells us that the vectors V1A, V2A, V2B form a right-angled triangle. Therefore, the vector equation for conservation of momentum can be drawn as shown below.
Thus, after impact ball A moves in a direction perpendicular to the direction of ball B. This is a very slick result.
There are two additional special cases to consider, involving ball collision.
For the case where the target ball B must be hit at an angle θ very close to zero (such as to sink it in the side pocket), ball A needs to be moving at a high speed V1A (meaning you would have to hit ball A quite hard with the cue). This is because only a very small fraction of the momentum of ball A (and therefore velocity) is transferred to ball B, due to the obliqueness of the impact.
For the case where the impact is head on (θ = 90°) the above solution does not apply. In this case V2A = 0 and V2B = V1A. This essentially means that the velocity of ball A is completely transferred to ball B.
For a more detailed and complete analysis, in which the trajectory of ball A is calculated (after impact), under the influence of friction between the ball and billiard table, see the problem, Cue ball trajectory with table friction.
The Sweet Spot
The physics of billiards is similar to the Physics Of Hitting A Baseball, in that there is also a sweet spot on a billiard ball where you can strike with the cue stick so that no friction force develops between the ball and the billiard table. Knowing the location of this sweet spot can give you an idea of where to hit the ball so that it develops backspin or forward spin, which can be useful when making a shot.
Consider the figure below showing the position of the cue at height h.
We wish to find the height h so that no (horizontal) frictional force develops at point P when the ball is struck by the cue.
Analysis Of The Sweet Spot
In this analysis, we can represent the ball + cue system with a free-body diagram as shown below.
Where:
F is the force the cue exerts on the ball when it strikes
r is the radius of the ball
G is the center of mass of the ball
g is the acceleration due to gravity, which is 9.8 m/s2
P is the point of contact of the ball with the billiard table
FPx is the x-component of the force exerted on the ball by the billiard table, at point P. This is a frictional force.
FPy is the y-component of the force exerted on the ball by the billiard table, at point P.
By Newton's Second Law, the general force equation in the x-direction is:
Where:
m is the mass of the ball
aGx is the acceleration of the center of mass in the x-direction
This equation becomes
Since FPx = 0 we get
By Newton's Second Law, the general force equation in the y-direction is:
where aGy is the acceleration of the center of mass in the y-direction.
Since the billiard ball only moves in the x-direction aGy = 0, so the above equation becomes
Therefore
We must now write the general moment equation for rotation of a rigid body about its center of mass G.
Where:
ΣMG is the sum of the moments about the center of mass G
IG is the moment of inertia of the ball about its center of mass, about an axis pointing out of the page
α is the angular acceleration of the ball
Since no frictional force develops between the ball and table, there is no relative slipping at point P. This means that we have a case of pure rolling. Thus, we can write the following:
In the above equation the negative sign is there to match the sign convention used in this problem.
The moment equation becomes
Combine equations (1) and (2) and we get
For a solid sphere
Therefore
This is the height to hit the ball so that no friction develops at point P. No matter how hard you hit the ball at this location, no friction (reaction) force will develop at point P. Therefore, pure rolling of the ball will always result after impact (no relative slipping).
In the cases where the cue strikes above or below this height h, friction is necessary to prevent the ball from slipping on the surface of the billiard table. And if the ball is hit hard enough (above or below height h) relative slipping will occur, due to insufficient friction between ball and table.
In the cases where slipping occurs we have the following inequality:
This means that there is relative motion between the ball and billiard table at point P immediately after impact. In other words (immediately after impact), the tangential velocity of the ball at point P is not equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the velocity of the center of mass of the ball G.
In the case of pure rolling, the tangential velocity of the ball at point P is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the velocity of the center of mass of the ball G. Therefore, the velocities cancel out and there is no relative slipping at point P.
Relative Slipping Analysis
Relative slipping between ball and billiard table is an interesting point of analysis. It's informative to understand how the ball moves depending on where it is hit relative to h.
Consider the figure below.
When the ball is hit sufficiently hard with a leftward force in region A1 the ball is given a leftward velocity, and is given a backspin in the CW direction. Relative slipping occurs at point P, and the resulting frictional force at this location is pointing right. The leftward velocity of the ball decreases and it accelerates to the right due to the direction of the frictional force. The rate of backspin decreases due to the direction of the frictional force. This occurs until relative slipping at point P stops and pure rolling occurs.
When the ball is hit sufficiently hard with a leftward force in region A2 the ball is given a leftward velocity, and is given a forward spin in the CCW direction. Relative slipping occurs at point P, and the resulting frictional force at this location is pointing right. The leftward velocity of the ball decreases and it accelerates to the right due to the direction of the frictional force. The rate of forward spin increases due to the direction of the frictional force. This occurs until relative slipping at point P stops and pure rolling occurs.
When the ball is hit sufficiently hard with a leftward force in region A3 the ball is given a leftward velocity, and is given a forward spin in the CCW direction. Relative slipping occurs at point P, and the resulting frictional force at this location is pointing left. The leftward velocity of the ball increases and it accelerates to the left due to the direction of the frictional force. The rate of forward spin decreases due to the direction of the frictional force. This occurs until relative slipping at point P stops and pure rolling occurs.
Thus, the nature of the slipping will change depending on which of the regions, (A1, A2, A3), the cue stick strikes the ball.
Note that for the three cases above, the frictional force that develops due to relative slipping is known as kinetic friction. Kinetic friction occurs when there is "rubbing" between two surfaces. This type of friction always opposes the direction of motion. So for example, if a crate is sliding on the floor in the left direction, the kinetic friction between the crate and floor acts to the right. In the cases where we have this type of friction you have to account for the direction of relative slipping and then assign the direction of friction to be in the opposite direction.
On the other hand, when there is no relative slipping between two surfaces the frictional force between them is known as static friction. So in the general cases where the billiard ball experiences no relative slipping at point P, we have static friction maintaining pure rolling. Accounting for static friction differs from kinetic friction in that you don't need to know the direction in which it acts. The direction is solved for in the dynamics equations. So in this sense it is easier to account for static friction than kinetic friction.
A Closer Look At Relative Slipping (optional)
This is a continuation of the previous section, with a more in-depth look at relative slipping. This section is optional, so you may skip it if you like.
The figure below shows a free-body diagram of a billiard ball experiencing a general case of relative slipping.
Where:
VG is the velocity of the center of mass of the ball. (In practical terms, when one refers to the velocity of the ball he is referring to the velocity of the center of mass of the ball).
w is the angular velocity of the ball
Let wi represent the initial angular velocity of the ball immediately after impact.
Let VGi represent the initial velocity of the ball immediately after impact.
With no loss of generality we can assume VGi is to the left (negative, according to the sign convention) and wi is either CW (negative) or CCW (positive).
If the cue strikes the ball in region A3 and relative slipping occurs, then
wir > -VGi.
If the cue strikes the ball anywhere below height h and relative slipping occurs, then wir < -VGi.
Set
This is equal to +1 or -1. This factor accounts for the direction of relative slipping, which is important to know since we are dealing with kinetic friction. Such factors are mathematically very convenient when accounting for the direction of kinetic friction. (Note that |x| means the absolute value of x).
From before
This is the normal force acting on the ball at point P.
The general force equation in the x-direction is:
The kinetic friction acting at P is given by:
where μk is the coefficient of kinetic friction between the ball and table.
Now,
The general moment equation for rotation of a rigid body about its center of mass G is:
This becomes
From equations (3) and (4) we get:
The linear velocity of the ball is:
where t is time
The angular velocity of the ball is:
We wish to find the time it takes for the ball to stop slipping, and begin pure rolling. Thus, using equations (5) and (6) we can formulate the following equality, which holds true when there is pure rolling:
From this we can solve for time t.
For a solid sphere
Therefore
Let's now find the distance traveled by the ball before pure rolling begins, using the time t from above.
The distance d is:
A final consideration is finding the velocity of the ball before pure rolling begins. To do this we calculate the velocity VG using the time t from above.
Note that the above three equations are only valid as long as there is relative slipping at point P.
Sample Calculation For Relative Slipping
This is a sample calculation using the results of the previous section.
VGi = -1 m/s (initial leftward velocity)
wi = -20 rad/s (backspin, CW rotation)
r = 0.028 m
μk = 0.3
g = 9.8 m/s2
δ = 1
aGx = 2.94 m/s2 - calculated from equation (3)
Therefore the time it takes the ball to stop slipping is
t = 0.15 s
The distance traveled by the ball during slipping is
d = -0.12 m (the ball has traveled to the left)
The velocity of the ball just before pure rolling begins is
VG = -0.56 m/s (leftward velocity)
Closing Remarks
As you can see, the physics of billiards can get pretty involved when you start considering all the things that can happen in a typical game of pool. You can bet that professional players are very proficient in the practical usage of the physics presented here, as well as other aspects of the game not discussed here.
Return to The Physics Of Sports page
Return to Real World Physics Problems home page
Home
Search Website
Real World Applications —
for high school level and above
Amusement Parks
Battle & Weapons
Engineering
Essays
Miscellaneous
Sports
Education & Theory —
for high school level and above
Kinematics
Dynamics
Useful Formulas
Physics Questions
Example Mechanics Problems
Learn Physics Compendium
Kids Section
Physics For Kids
Science Experiments
Science Fair Ideas
Science Quiz
Science Toys
Teacher Resources
Site Info
About Me
Advertise
Contact
Commercial Disclosure
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Free Newsletter
Subscribe to my free newsletter below. In it I explore physics ideas that seem like science fiction but could become reality in the distant future. I develop these ideas with the help of AI. I will send it out a few times a month.
Email
I am at least 16 years of age.
I have read and accept the privacy policy.
I understand that you will use my information to send me a newsletter.
Subscribe
© Copyright 2009-2025 real-world-physics-problems.com
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies. Learn more.
Got it!
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/theorie_mathematique_des_effets_du_jeu_de_billard_par_g_coriolis.pdf
title: Théorie mathématique des effets du jeu de billard / par G. Coriolis
topics: history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
Théorie mathématique des
effets du jeu de billard / par G.
            Coriolis

     Source gallica.bnf.fr / Bibliothèque nationale de France
 Coriolis, Gustave (1792-1843). Théorie mathématique des effets
 du jeu de billard / par G. Coriolis. 1835.

1/ Les contenus accessibles sur le site Gallica sont pour la plupart
des reproductions numériques d'oeuvres tombées dans le
domaine public provenant des collections de la BnF. Leur
réutilisation s'inscrit dans le cadre de la loi n°78-753 du 17 juillet
1978 :
- La réutilisation non commerciale de ces contenus est libre et
gratuite dans le respect de la législation en vigueur et notamment
du maintien de la mention de source.
- La réutilisation commerciale de ces contenus est payante et fait
l'objet d'une licence. Est entendue par réutilisation commerciale la
revente de contenus sous forme de produits élaborés ou de
fourniture de service.

CLIQUER ICI POUR ACCÉDER AUX TARIFS ET À LA LICENCE

2/ Les contenus de Gallica sont la propriété de la BnF au sens de
l'article L.2112-1 du code général de la propriété des personnes
publiques.

3/ Quelques contenus sont soumis à un régime de réutilisation
particulier. Il s'agit :

- des reproductions de documents protégés par un droit d'auteur
appartenant à un tiers. Ces documents ne peuvent être réutilisés,
sauf dans le cadre de la copie privée, sans l'autorisation préalable
du titulaire des droits.
- des reproductions de documents conservés dans les
bibliothèques ou autres institutions partenaires. Ceux-ci sont
signalés par la mention Source gallica.BnF.fr / Bibliothèque
municipale de ... (ou autre partenaire). L'utilisateur est invité à
s'informer auprès de ces bibliothèques de leurs conditions de
réutilisation.

4/ Gallica constitue une base de données, dont la BnF est le
producteur, protégée au sens des articles L341-1 et suivants du
code de la propriété intellectuelle.

5/ Les présentes conditions d'utilisation des contenus de Gallica
sont régies par la loi française. En cas de réutilisation prévue dans
un autre pays, il appartient à chaque utilisateur de vérifier la
conformité de son projet avec le droit de ce pays.

6/ L'utilisateur s'engage à respecter les présentes conditions
d'utilisation ainsi que la législation en vigueur, notamment en
matière de propriété intellectuelle. En cas de non respect de ces
dispositions, il est notamment passible d'une amende prévue par
la loi du 17 juillet 1978.

7/ Pour obtenir un document de Gallica en haute définition,
contacter
reutilisationcommerciale@bnf.fr.
     THÉORIE MATHÉMATIQUE

                 DES EFFETS

DU JEU DE BILLARD,

             PAR G. CORIOLIS

                    PARIS,
   CARILIAN-GOEURY          LIBRAIRE-ÉDITEUR
DES CORPS ROYAUX DES PONTS ET CHAUSSÉES ET DES MINES,
              Quai des Augustins, N° 41.
                        :835.
 THÉORIE MATHÉMATIQUE

      DES EFFETS

DU JEU DE BILLARD.
PARU.     IMPRIMERIE ET FONDERIR DE FAIN
        nue Racine, n. 4. l'lace de l'Odron.
                   PRÉFACE.

  LE jeu de billard, tel qu'il est devenu aujourd'hui,
par l'usage des queues propres à donner aux billes d'as-
sez forts mouvemens de rotation offre divers problèmes
de dynamique que l'on trouvera résolus dans cet
                                                 ouvrage.
Je pense que les personnes qui ont des connaissances de
mécanique rationnelle comme les élèves de l'École
Polytechnique, verront avec intérêt l'explication de tous
les effets singuliers qu'on observe dans le mouvement des
billes.
   C'est après avoir vu produire ces effets par le célèbre
joueur Mingaud, que j'ai essayé, il y a déjà long-temps,
de les soumettre au calcul. J'avais trouvé alors ce qui
fait l'objet du premier et du huitième chapitre de cet
ouvrage. Depuis j'ai complété ce qui se rapporte plus
spécialement au choc des billes, en ayant égard au frot-
tement.
   Je dois à l'obligeance de M. Mingaud d'avoir pu m'as-
surer en le voyant jouer, que les formules et les con-
structions qui s'en déduisent donnent des résultats con-
formes à l'expérience.
   M. de Tholozé, gouverneur de l'École Polytechnique,
a bien voulu m'indiquer divers coups compliqués dont
la théorie m'a donné ensuite l'explication ainsi c'est par
lui que j'ai vu produire l'effet indiqué par les construc-
tions des figures3    et 67, qui sont expliquées dans le
cours de l'ouvrage.
   M. Poisson dans la nouvelle édition de son Traité de
mécanique, a examiné les effets du frottement sur une
sphère qui se meut en ligne droite cette question est
                                                   dans le
un cas particulier de celle qu'on a à résoudre
jeu de billard. Le fils du célèbre Euler s'est occupé du
mouvement d'une sphère sur un plan, en ayant égard
au seul frottement de glissement. Son
                                         mémoire, dont je
n'ai eu connaissance que depuis que j'avais déjà terminé
                                                         de
mon travail, est inséré dans le recueil de l'académie
Berlin, année 1758. On n'y trouve de commun avec cet
                                                    dans le
ouvrage qu'une des propositions que je donne
premier chapitre d'une manière plus simple elle con-
siste en ce que la courbe décrite par le centre de la bille
est une parabole quand on ne considère que le frotte-
ment de glissement. Ce géomètre n'a pas donné le théo-
rème au moyen duquel même en considérant les deux
frottemens on obtient la marche de la bille lorsqu'elle
finit par rouler.Pour ce qui concerne l'effet du frottement
dans le choc des billes entre elles et avec la bande, et
pour tout ce qui se rapporte au coup de queue incliné,
je ne crois pas qu'on s'en soit encore occupé.
   J'ai pensé que quelques personnes qui ne voudraient
pas entrer dans le détail des démonstrations, et qui ce-
pendant auraient assez de connaissances mathématiques
pour entendre le langage et les principaux signes de cette
science, seraient Lien aises de trouver à part un résumé
des règles et des constructions fournies par la théorie
c'est pourquoi je l'ai présenté en tête de l'ouvrage. Les
lecteurs qui voudraient examiner plutôt les questions
sous le point de vue mathématique pourront passer cet
exposé, qui se trouve reproduit dans l'ouvrage avec les
démonstrations. Néanmoins, on devra y recourir pour
l'explication des planches 6, 7   8, 9,10,11 et 12; elle
se trouve aux pages de 32 à 3g    et de 46 à 5o.
                         TABLE

          DES CHAPITRES.

Exposé des principalesconséquencesde la théorie et des
 constructionsqui donnent les mouvemensdes    billes.          1
          Ier. -Du mouvementd'une bille sur un plan hori-
CHAPITRE
                             frottemens
                  choc
  zontal en ayant égard aux                                   51
CHAPITRE  II. De l'effetdu coup de queue horizontal. 78
CHAPITRE  III. Du choc de deux billes et du carambolage
  en négligeantle frottement très-petit qui a lieu entre les
 billespendant le                                            ioi
CHAPITRE  IV. Des effets d'un deuxièmechoc entre deux
 billes, après un premier choc.                              112
CHAPITRE  V. Du choc de deux billes, en ayant égard, au

          choc.                  masses.
 frottement entre les billes pendant le choc, au défaut
  d'élasticité, et à l'inégalitédes                          1 19

         choc.
CHAPITRE  YI. -Du choc contre la bande soit directement,
  soit après un autre                                        i 35
Chapitre VII. Cas particulieroù il faut modifierlesformu-
 les et lesconstructionsrelativesà l'effetdu frottementpen-
 dant le                                                     143
CHAPITRE  VIII. De l'effetdu coup de queue   incliné.        146
                       EXPOSÉ
 Des principales conséquences de la théorie, et des
                                                    construc-
        tions qui donnent les mouvemens des billes.

   JE commencerai par définir quelques termes, et
 par poser les principales notations dont je me ser-

            d'appui de la bille. C'est le point
        Point
                                                 par lequel
 elle repose sur le tapis et où s'exerce le frottement.
      Point' supérieur de la bille. C'est le point situé à
 l'opposé du point d'appui
                                 sur le diamètre vertical
 passant par ce point.
    Le contre supérieur de percussion d'oscillation de
 la bille. C'est un point situé           ou
                                  sur la verticale passant
 par le centre à une distance au-dessus de ce centre,
 égale aux y du rayon.
    Le centre intérieur de percussion. C'est
                                               un point si-
tué au-dessous du centre aux du
                                        rayon.
   Le premier point est le centre de percussion
rapport à un axe de suspension passant par le point     par
d'appui; le second point est le centre analogue
                                                    en fai-
sant passer l'axe de suspension parle point supérieur
de la bille, c'est-à-dire par l'autre extrémité du
                                                       dia-
mètre vertical qui va au point d'appui.
   Axe de rotation. C'est l'axe dont tous les points
la même vitesse que le centre.
                                                       ont
   La direction de cet axe de rotation est celle d'une
ligne partant du centre et dirigée
                                         sur cet axe, d'un
côté tel que la rotation qui a lieu se fasse de gauche à
droite autour de cette ligne, pour un observateur
voyant la bille par le côte où aboutit cette direction.
Ainsi quand la bille roule sans glisser autour d'un axe
horizontal et qu'elle s'éloigne du joueur, la direction
de l'axe de rotation est le rayon horizontal à droite
du joueur.
  Vitesse de rotation au point d'appui. C'est la vitesse
qu'aurait le point d'appui de la bille, en vertu de la
seule vitesse de rotation autour de son centre supposé
immobile.
   Rotation directe, C'est la rotation qui a lieu dans le
même sens que lorsque la bille roule sans glisser sur
le tapis; ou si l'on veut, c'est la rotation qui a lieu
lorsque la vitesse de rotation au point d'appui tombe
du côté opposé il la vitesse de translation du centre
de la bille dans ce cas l'axe de rotation se porte à
droite du joueur.
    Rotation rétrograde,. C'est la rotation qui a lieu dans
le sens opposé à la rotation directe, c'est-à-dire quand
la vitesse au point d'appui tombe du côté de la vitesse
de translation de la bille dans ce cas l'axe de rota-
 tion se porte à gauche du joueur.
    État de glissement. C'est l'état où se trouve la bille
 à l'instant où la vitesse de rotation au point d'appui
 est nulle, c'est-à-dire où Taxe de rotation est ver-
 tical, si la vitesse de rotation autour de cet axe n'est
 pas nulle.
    État final de la bille. C'est l'état où elle se trouve
 quand elle roule sur le tapis en ligne droite sans qu'il
 y ait de glissement, et par conséquent de frottement
  de première espèce au point d'appui. La vitesse de
rotation au point d'appui se trouve alors égale et
directement opposée à la vitesse de translation du
centre. Dans cet état final les vitesses de translation
et de rotation changent assez peu pour qu'on puisse
les regarder comme constantes.
   La directionfinale, c'est la direction du
                                             mouvement
de la bille quand elle est à l'état final.
  État varié de la bille. C'est l'état où elle trouve
                                               se
avant  d'être à l'état final, c'est-à-dire quand le point
d'appui glisse et conséquemment frotte
                                             sur le tapis.
Dans cet état les vitesses de translation et de rotation
varient très-rapidement pour arriver ensemble à
leurs valeurs finales.
  Voici maintenant les principales notations dont
nous ferons usage
  M' masse de la queue           elle est ordinairement
égale à trois fois celle de la bille.
  W' la vitesse de la queue avant qu'elle choque la
bille.
  R le rayon de la bille.
  M la masse de la bille.
  W,     la vitesse initiale du centre de la bille, c'est-à-
dire celle qu'elle prend après le coup de
                                              queue.
   Wo la vitesse initiale du centre
                                      pour la même vi-
tesse de la queue, quand la ligne du choc passe
                                                   par le
centre de la bille.
   W la vitesse du centre de la bille à un instant quel-
conque de son mouvement.
   Wa la vitesse qu'a le point de la bille qui est
                                                      au
point d'appui.
   Wr la vitesse qu'aurait ce même point d'appui de
la bille en vertu de la rotation,
                                  en faisant abstraction
de la vitesse W du cen tre en sorte que Wa est la ré-
sultante de Wr et de W.
   w la vitesse de rotation du point situé sur la ver-
ticale passant par le centre et aux du rayon au-dessus
de ce centre, point que nous avons appelé centre su-
périeur de percussion; cette vitesse w est égale et
opposée
  Les
         à   Wr.
       valeurs initiales des vitesses seront toujours
désignées par des accens placés au bas des lettres.
  y la distance rectiligne parcourue par la bille de-
puis l'instant où elle a reçu le coup de queue jusqu'à
un instant quelconque, en supposant qu'elle se meuve
en ligne droite.
  y   la distance rectiligne parcourue par la bille dans
la même supposition, lorsqu'elle est arrivée à son état
final ou de roulement.
   y. distance analogue lorsque la bille est arrivée à
l'état de glissement.
   p, q, r, les trois projections sur trois axes rectan-
gulaires des x, des y- et des z de la vitesse angu-
laire de rotation portée sur l'axe de rotation du
côté indiqué pour sa direction; ces axes étant pris
 ordinairement de manière que la direction du mou-
vement du centre soit celle dcs y positifs, la per-
pendiculaire horizontale à droite sur le tapis soit l'axe
 des x, et la verticale au-dessus du tapis soit l'axe des z.
   Ces quantités peuvent encore être définies en disant
 que Rp Rq Rr s'obtiendraient en prenant les vitesses
 des points situés sur des grands cercles parallèles aux
 plans coordonnés, lesquelles vitesses seraient ensuite
 projetées sur ks mêmes plans. Cette manière de dé-
 finirces quantités résulte de cette proposition, que pour
 tous les points d'un grand cercle d'une sphère, les vi-
 tesses, qui en général sont différentes en grandeur et
 en direction, ont des projections constantes sur le
plan de ce cercle.
    L la hauteur au-dessus du tapis où la ligne du choc

vient rencontrer le plan vertical mené par le centre
de la bille perpendiculairement au plan vertical du
choc.
   Ia la distance du plan vertical du choc
                                             au centre de
la bille cette quantité étant positive ou négative,
suivant que ce plan est pour le joueur à droite ou à
gauche du centre.
   a la plus courte distance de la ligne du choc au
centre de la bille. Quand le coup de queue est hori-
zontal, on a rt'r=a(R /)'+ h\
     le coefficient du frottement du tapis sur la bille
pendant le mouvement, c'est-à-dire le rapport entre
son poids et la force produite par le frottement. On a
trouvé par expérience quef=o,25 sur un tapis or-
dinaire. Ce coefficient doit varier un peu avec les
tapis, mais on n'a pas trouvé de variations très-sen-
sibles sur ceux qu'on a éprouvés.
  f le coefficient du frottement entre le tapis et la
bille, soit pendant le choc contre la bande, soit pen-
dant le choc de la bille contre le tapis quand on donne
un coup de queue incliné. Ce coefficient, pour le choc
contre la bande, a été trouvé de 0,20.
       le frottement qui se produit entre deux billes
pendant le choc. Ce coefficient est très-petit, il ne dé-
passe pas o,o3.
   0 la portion de la force vive totale de la queue et de
la bille qui est perdue dans le choc de ces deux corps.
    L'expérience montre que cette fraction peut être re-
    gardée comme constante et égale à o,i3.
       s la portion de vitesse normale qui est rendue dans
    le choc de la bille contre la bande. Cette fraction reste
    très-près de o,55 pour beaucoup de bandes qui ont
    été essayées; mais elle varie un peu avec les vi tesses, de
    telle sorte qu'elle se réduit à o,5o pour des vitesses
    de 7m. par secondes, limites des vitesses des billes au
    billard, et qu'elle est de 0,60 pour de très-petites vi-
    tesses de moins de im,oo.

    Du mouvement d'une bille sur le tapis, sans considérer d'abord
              la cause qui a produit ce mouvement.
       Une bille ayant un certain mouvement initial qui
    est tel que l'axe de rotation ait une position quelcon-
    que par rapport à la direction du mouvement du
    centre, décrit une ligne courhe par l'effet du frotte-
    ment que le tapis exerce au point d'appui. De quelques
    natzcre que soient les frottemens, la résultante de la
    vitesse du contre de la bille et de la vitesses dit centre de
    perezcssion supérieure est toujours constante en grandeur
    et en directiora pendant le mouvemerzt. Cette direction
    est celle que nous avons appelée finale,c'est-à-dire celle
    que prend le centre de la bille quand elle cesse de frot-
    ter au point d'appui et qu'elle roulc simplement sur le
    tapis.
       Quand on néglige le frottement de roulement qui
    est insensible, la direction de la vitesse au point d'ap-
v   pui, et conséquemment la direction du frottementde
    glissement, est toujours constante pendant le mou-
    vement, en sorte que, comme d'une autre part son
    intensité est indépendante de la vitesse, la courbe dé-
    crite par la bille est une parabole.
  Si A B (Jîg. i ) représente la vitesse de translation du
centre, A G la vitesse de rotation du point d'appui
dans sa propre direction, et A F la vitesse égale et
opposée à celle de rotation du point d'appui, c'est-à-
dire la vitesse de rotation du point supérieur de la
bille qui est diamétralement oppose au point d'appui;
le frottement agira toujours dans la direction de B
vers F, de sorte que la vitesse de la bille reste uni-
forme dans le sens perpendiculaire à EF et qu'elle
est accélérée ou retardée dans le sens HF seulement.
   Pour que la bille marche en ligne droite, il faut
que l'axe de rotation soit dans un plan vertical per-
pendiculaire à la direction du mouvement, ou, ce
qui revient au même, que la vitesse de rotation AG
au point d'appui soit sur la même ligne que la vitesse
AE de translation du centre. Quand ces deux vitesses
font un angle, le mouvement commence toujours par
se faire en ligne courbe jusqu'à ce que ces vitesses,
dont les directions vont continuellementen s'écartant,
soient devenues égales et opposées. A partir du mo-
ment où cette circonstance a lieu, la bille roule sans
frotter, et son mouvement se fait en ligne droite sans
que la vitesse de rotation ni l'axe de rotation changent
de direction ni de grandeur.
   Pendant le mouvement de la bille, les vitesses AB
et AF vont en se rapprochant l'une de l'autre, de telle
sorte que si l'on ne s'occupe que du changement de
ces vitesses en faisant abstraction du mouvement du
centre A de la bille qu'on laissera à la même place sur
la figure i, alors les extrémités B' et F' des nouvelles
vitesses variables AB' et AF' restent sur la droite FB,
et s'avancent l'une vers l'autrejusqu'à ce qu'elles soient
 réunies au point E, placé de manière qu'on ait EB=
7FB.
   Si sur la direction AG de la vitesse du point d'ap-
pui on porte AH c=s AG, la ligne AH sera la vitesse
du centre de percussion inférieur; l'extrémité H de
cette vitesse, qui s'emploie beaucoup dans 1 es construc-
tions qu'on indiquera plus loin, se déplace de manière
à avancer d'une grandeur HH' égale et parallèle à la
longueur BB', dont le point B a avancé en même
temps. Si l'on porte AH' de B' en D en sens opposé,
le point D restera constant pendant que B' marchera
de B vers E DU sera alors la vitesse de rotation du
centre de percussion supéricur,tandisqucAH'est celle
du centre de percussion inférieur. Cette construction
est liée à la proposition énoncée plus haut, savoir
que la direction de la vitesse finale est toujours la
direction de la résultante de la vitesse du centre
de la bille et de la vitesse de rotation du centre supé-
rieur de percussion.Mais il faut faire attention que la
grandeur AE de la vitesse finale n'est que les de cette
résultante AD ou HB.
   Si le frottement a une intensité constante f, le point
B' s'approche de sa position finale E en parcourant
par seconde un espace fg ou 2m,45 g étant égal à
9,8og, et f étant d'après diverses expériences d'en-
viron o,a5.
   Pour avoir le point L où sera la bille sur le tapis,
lorsqu'en partant de A elle sera arrivée à son état fi-
nal on tirera AM au point IVI milieu de EB; le point L
sera sur AM à une distance AL de A qui sera à AM
dans le rapport de BM à           ou de BE à fg. Pour
 faire cette réduction, par construction on mènera
 AJ parallèle à FB et égal à fg-; cette droite cou-
 pera HB en I; on joindra JM, et par I menant IL
 parallèle à JM jusqu'à sa rencontre L avec AM, on
 aura le point L où sera la bille au moment où elle
 commencera à être à son état final ce sera par ce
 point qu'on tracera la marche finale LV dans la di-
rection de HB ou de la parallèle AD. La marche courbe
 sera une parabole AL tangente en A et L aux droites
 AB et LV, qui sont les directions initiale et finale du
 mouvement du centre de la bille.
   Les vitesses variables W, Wr et w c'est-à-dire
AB', AF' ou AG', et AH' ou DB' de la figure i, sont les
seuls élémens dont on ait besoin pour connaître ce qui
arrive dans le choc contre une autre bille. Si l'on
veut les construire pour chaque position de la bille
sur la courbe AL qu'elle décrit (/3), on remarquera
que la vitesse de translation étant uniforme dans le
sens AP perpendiculaire à EF, il suffira de prendre
sur cette perpendiculaire des iotervalles égaux An',
n'n", n"l, et de remarquer que si les deux vitesses
AB' et AF' étaient portées à partir de ces points n'n"l,
leurs extrémités b', b"f, f" se trouveraient sur les
droites BE' et FEI menees des points B et F au point
E', extrémité de la perpendiculaire EE' à BF, laquelle
serait prise égale à AI projection de la courbe AL
sur AP. Mais en vertu de ce que ces vitesses doivent
se porter à partir des points A', A" et L, il faudra re-
porter les points b', b"        et E' du côté de la courbe
AL     et parallèlement à BF des quantités b'B',fF', et
b"B",f'F", et E'B", égales aux ordonnéesde cette courbe
az'A', ri'A" et IL. Par cette construction, les directions
A'jV, A"13" sont celles des tangentes à la courbe AL,
puisque ce sont celles des vitesses du centre de la bille
qui décrit effectivement cette courbe.
   Quant au point H qui est l'extrémité de la vitesse
du centre de percussion infërieur, il décrit la courbe
HJ1'H"H'" égale et parallèle à la courbe Blj'B"B"' dé-
crite par le point B. Le point D, extrémité de la
vitesse BD == AH', portée à partir de B', décrira une
courbeDD'D"D"' tout-à-fait égale à la courbe AA'A'X
parcourue par la bille pendant ce mouvement. La
droite AD, résultante des vitesses Alp, B'D', se trans-
porte en restant égale et parallèle à elle-même.
   Quant à la vitesse horizontale Rr des points de l'é-
quateur horizontal de la bille, elle reste sensiblement
constante pendant le mouvement de la bille.

               Du coup de queue horizontal.

   Nous définirons d'abord les expressions suivantes
   La ligne du claoc. C'est la ligne menée par le point
où la queue va frapper la bille dans la direction du
mouvement de cette queue, qui est toujours supposée
celle de son axe de figure.
   Plan verticale dit clzoc. C'est le plan vertical mené
par la ligne du choc.
   Bien que la ligne du choc ne passe pas par le cen-
tre due la bille, pourvu qu'on ne frappe pas à une dis-
tance du centre qui atteigne la limite ou le frotte-
ment ne peut plus empêcher le bout de la queue
de glisser sur la bille pendant le coup, la direction
initiale de la bille ne dépend pas du frottement qui
s'établit entre la queue et la bille; cette direction
ne dépend que de celle du coup de queue, ou
 autrement dit, de la direction de la ligne du choc;
 c'est ce qui fait qu'on peut alors assurer le tir. Si l'on
frappela bille plus loin du centre que cette limite, la-
quelle sera beaucoup moins étendue ou n'existera
plus si le bout de la queue prend une petite vitesse
transversale, c'est-à-dire perpendiculaire à l'axe de la
queue, alors le tir n'est plus assuré, et l'on fait fausse
queue. La limite de la distance cc du centre où l'on
puisse frapper la bille avec une queue garnie et bien
frottée de craie, est au plus de o,7o R, si le coup est
bien assuré sans vitesse transversale.
    Toutes les fois que la ligne du choc ou l'axe de la
queue qui lui est parallèle sera horizontale, ou bien
toutes les fois que le plan vertical du choc passera par
le centre de la bille celle-ci ira en ligne droite. Ainsi,
dans le jeu ordinaire, dès qu'on tient la queue de
niveau, si l'on ne fait pas fausse queue, en quelque
point qu'on frappe la bille, celle-ci ira en ligne
droite dans la direction de la ligne du choc.
   Le mouvement en ligne droite commencera, en gé-
néral, par un mouvement varié qui ne deviendra
uniforme que lorsque la bille sera arrivée à l'état
final de roulement. Le mouvement varié sera retardé
si la ligne du choc passe au-dessous du plan hori-
zontal mené par le centre de percussion; si la ligne
du choc est dans ce plan, la bille prend de suite son état
final; et si la ligne du choc était au-dessus de ce plan, le
mouvement varié serait accéléré jusqu'à l'état final.
Mais cette dernière circonstance n'arrive guère dans
le jeu ordinaire parce qu'il faudrait frapper trop près
du point où l'on commence à faire fausse queue.
    Wo étant la vitesse que prendrait le centre de la
bille sous le même coup de queue, c'est-à-dire
                                                    avec
la même vitesse de la queue si la ligne du choc
                                                     pas-
sait par le centre, et a étant la distance de la ligne
du choc au centre; on a pour la vitesse W, que prend
le centre de la bille par l'effet du coup de
                                             queue,,

  Cette vitesse devient Wo quand on a a = o.
  Dans les limites où l'on peut prendre la distance
a, c'est-à-dire de a = o àa=o,6oK, ainsi qu'on
l'expliquera plus loin, en prenant       =^, Q = o,i3,
cette valeur est représentée dans la figure 4 par
les   ordonnées de la courbe C'CC"C', dont les
abscisses OR ou M"M sont les distances a du point
du choc au centre 0 de la bille. Ainsi, en prenant
pour le cercle tracé dans la figure le grand cercle de
la bille perpendiculaire à la direction du choc, mais
dans une proportion beaucoup plus grande par rap-
port à l'échelle des vitesses, T représentant le point
oit la ligne du choc vient percer le plan vertical de
ce cercle, on reportera la distance OT pour en faire
l'abscisse OR l'ordonnée MC correpondante sera
la vitesse W, du centre. L'ordonnée Mil Cil maximum
de la courbe, est la vitesse W'o que prendrait le
centre de la bille si le même coup de queue avait été
donné au centre. Comme on verra que le coup
de queue ne peut pas être donné au delà de 0,60 R du
centre on n'a pas étendu la courbe au delà de cette
distance.
   Les vitesses de rotation des points du grand cercle
horizontal de la bille projetées sur le plan de ce cercle
c'est-à-dire la valeur de Rr, est constante pendant le
mouvement. Elle est donnée par la formule

Pour l'avoir au moyen de la vitesse WrJ qui est celle
du centre, c'est-à-dire l'ordonnéc de la courbe C'CC'C,
il suffira de modifier cette ordonnée dans le rapport
de h à    R   h étant la distance ET entre le plan ver-
tical du choc et le centre de la bille.
   Si le coup de queue est donné à la hauteur du
centre, alors on a a h. Si dans ce cas on fait varier
h la valeur de Rr variera ainsi
                                  que le représentent les
ordonnées PR des deux courbes ORR' (fig. 8). En par-
tant de la formule ci dessus qui donne W, en
fonction de Wo on trouve que le maximum de Rr
répond à très-peu près à = o,5o R. Ainsi, pour avoir
la plus grande vitesse de rotation autour de l'axe ver-
tical, il faut frapper la bille à une distance du centre
égale iz la moitié du rayon.
   Dans ce cas on a
                      Rr=o,75We.
La plus grande valeur de W est de 7™ pour un
très-fort coup de queue. Ainsi, on a alors
                       Rr= 5,25.
  La vitesse du centre de la bille à l'instant où elle est
à l'état de glissement est égale à W,         W   étant la
vitesse initiale du centre de la bille, et l la hauteur du
choc au-dessus du tapis.
  La vitesse du centre de la bille, quand elle est à l'é-
tat final, est toujours égale   à   W,

  La quantité W    a été construite pour différentes
valeurs de l, en supposant lc = oeta2=         (/
                                                Rv:
ces valeurs sont représentées {fg. 9 ) par les ordon-
nées horizontales d'à', dit, DH, D'H\ et de la courbe
h'h,Wll H", dont les abscisses MD sont les hauteurs l.
Si l'on cherche le maximum deW,          dans ce cas on
trouve qu'il répond à   l=    i,i9R; ainsi pour avoir la
plus grande vitesse possible soit à l'état final, soit à
F état de glissement, il faut frapper au-dessus du
                                                   centre
à une hauteur qui est environ le cinquième du
                                                rayon.
  Dans ce cas !a quantité W, devient

La plus grande valeur Wo pour un très-fort
                                             coup de
queue étant de 7,oo, on a alors pour la vitesse finale

   Lorsque le coup de queue est horizontal, ainsi que
nous le supposons, et que la bille marche en ligne
droite, on peut représenter la vitesse du centre
                                                   par
les ordonnées d'une parabole à axe horizontal (fig.6),
dont le sommet K sera à une distance ou             du
point de départ M, et dont l'ordonnée de départ MC
sera égale à la vitesse initiale W,. Les abscisses MD
seront les espaces décrits par la bille sur le tapis à
partir du point de départ M et les ordonnées AD re-
présenteront les vitesses de la bille tant qu'elle ne sera
pas à l'état final. Si l'on fait varier la vitesse Wi? les pa-
raboles resterort t dc même forme; elles aurontpourpa-
                       longueur
ramèt.re commun la                     elles ne différeront

que parce que leurs sommets K', K, K" s'éloigneront
plus ou moins du point de départ M de la bille.
   Quandla bille sera à l'état final, la vitesse demeu-
rant à très-peu près constante, sera représentée par
l'ordonnée de l'horizontale GL, dontnous indiquerons
plus loin la construction.
    Si l'on trace l'horizontale PE à une hauteur MP
qui soit à CM dans le rapport de la hauteur 1 où la
queue va toucher la bille au rayon R de cette bille, le
point où cette horizontale rencontre la parabole
donnera par son abscisse MI la distance on la bille se
trouve à l'état de glissement. Cette hauteur MP se
trouve donnée dans la figure 5 par la distance LP. Elle
se construit facilement au moyen de MM"=R, M"L–
et ML– W, puisqu'on a alors LP = W,
   En menant l'horizontale GL, figure 6, à une hau-
teur MF:=i MP, c'est-à-dire à une hauteur égale à la
vitesse finale de la bille, le point G où elle coupe la
parabole donnera, par sa projection sur l'axe MK le
point Q où commence sur le tapis cet état final.
   Si F tombe en dessus de G, c'est-à-dire si        R
(fiyure 7), alors il faut en même temps retourner le
sens de la parabole; son sommet sera en K; les or-
données de C en G représenteront les vitesses au
delà de G on sera dans l'état final dont la vitesse sera
 constamment D A.
    En mème temps que l'ordonnée AD de la parabolere-
 présente à chaque instant la vitesse de translation de
 la bille, la partieAH de cette ordonnée, comprise entre
 la courbe et l'horizontale PE qui donne le point de
 glissement I, représente la vitesse w de rotation du
 centre d'oscillation supérieur de la bille.Cette quantité
 est fort importante à considérer, elle s'emploie con-
 stamment dans toutes les constructions qu'on indi-
 quera plus loin pour trouver la marche de la bille après
le choc contre une autre bille ou contre la bande. La
somme ou la différence des vitesses W et w du centre
de la bille et de son centre de percussion supérieur,
reste constante pendant le mouvement et égale à
W         C'est la somme qui est constante quand la rota-
tion est directe et que w est dans le même sens que
W; c'est la différence quand 1V tombe en sens opposé
de W. On se rappelle que dans le cas du mouvement
en ligne courbe, c'est la résultante de ces deux vitesses
W et zv qui reste constante.
    Quand le point A de la parabole est en dessus de
la droite PE, la rotation est rétrograde; quand il est
en dessous, la rotation est directe. Il n'v a de vitesse
de rotation rétrograde qu'autant qu'on a /<R, c'est-à-
dire qu'autant que la ligne du choc est plus basse
                                                      que
le centre de la bille.
   Si la ligne du choc est dans le plan horizontal
                                                     pas-
sant par le centre de la bille, celle-ci est à l'état de
glissement au moment du départ, et il n'y jamais de
                                              a
rotation rétrograde. Si la ligne du choc est au-dessus
du plan horizontal passant par le centre, la rotation
est toujours directe, et la bille ne se trouve jamais à
l'état de glissement.
   Le mouvement varié que prend la bille du joueur,
soit après en avoir choqué une autre, soit après avoir
frappé la bande, dépendant principalement, comme
on le verra plus loin, de l'espèce de rotation qu'elle
possède au moment du choc, les effets sont tous dif-
iërens suivant que la bille est à l'état de rotation
rétrograde ou à l'état de glissement, ou à l'état de
rotation directe, ou enfin à l'état final de roulement.
Il importe donc de connaître le lieu du tapis oû se
trouve la bille dans son mouvement rectiligne, quand
elle est l'état de glissement, puisqu'avant ce point
elle est à l'état de rotation rétrograde, et après à l'état
de rotation directe. Il importe aussi de connaître le
point où elle est à l'état final, puisqu'à partir de ce
point les effets sont constans.
   En adoptant les notations posées précédemment
on a pour la distancer, entre le point de départ et
celui où la bille se trouve à l'état de glissement,
c'est-à-dire pour MI de la figure 6,

et pour la distancer ou MQ de la même figure, entre
le point de départ et le point où la bille commence à
être à l'état de roulement

Quand on frappe la bille au centre, on a
   Ainsi la distance MQ ( fig. 6 ) parcourue par la
bille avant qu'elle arrive à l'état final quand elle a été
frappée à la hauteur du centre, est égale à moitié de
la longueur MK de la parabole.
  En prenant/=: o, 25 on a à très-peu près

  La vitesse Wo qui est la valeur que prend W, quand
on frappe au centre, est pour de très-forts coups de
queue d'environ 7,oo, ou telle qu'on a

  Si l'on frappe le plus bas possible   c'est-à-direpour
  = o,4o R; on a alors
 Les expressions de jo et        n
                                contiennent la vitesse
W, du centre de la bille. Celle-ci dépend de la vitesse
Wo que prendrait ce centre, si
                                     en choquant avec la
même vitesse de la queue on avait frappe
la valeur a été posée précédemment.
                                            au centre;
   Lorsque le plan vertical du choc
                                    passe par le centre
et que /z=o, alors la distance a qui entre dans
l'expression de W, en fonction de Wo, est égale à
R--l ou        .R. Si l'on remplace ainsi a
                                             par cette
valeur dans l'expression de
                                   7o, qu'on mette pour
le
     rapport M
                  la valeur 3 qu'il a ordinairement,
                                                       que
l'on remplace r par o,13
                         on trouve que cette expres-
sion a un maximum par rapport à 1 pour
                       R    /=o,25R.
     Le lieu du tapis où la bille est à l'état de glissement
étant celui où la bille cesse de pouvoir reculer après
en avoir frappé une autre, ainsi qu'on le dira plus
loin, il s'ensuit qu'avec zcn coup de
                                        queue d'une inten-
sité déterminée, la bille conservera le plus loirt possible
la faculté de reculer après
                                en avoir choqué une autre
en un point qui rze soit pas trop éloigné du point d'ar-
rière, si l'on frappe la bille à environ le quart du
en-dessous dtc centre.                               rayon
   Pour les valeurs adoptées pour f, 8, M et M'
                                                      on a
pour la valeur maximum

     Ainsi pour un coup de queue ordinaire qui donne
     = 4,80, on a
                        j.= i,58.
  Et pour un très-fort coup de queue qui donne

lfg                            j)j°
                         y,,
  Si l'on veut, non pas conserver le plus loin
                                                    possible
la faculté de reculer après le choc, mais l'avoir la plus
grande possible près du point de départ, il faut frap-
      le  plus  bas  possible  sans faire fausse queue. Mais
per
il y a une limite à cet abaissement de la ligne du choc,
cette limite résulte de la condition que le bout de la
queue ne continue pas de
                                 toucher la bille et de frotter
contre elle après le choc; car alors le frottement dé-
truit très-vite la rotation rétrograde. En se donnant
donc cette condition de la séparation de la queue de
la bille après le choc, on trouve qu'on ne peut frap-
       la  bille  à une  distance  du centre de plus de 0,60
 per
 du rayon, et cela, en supposant qu'on tienne la
                                                    qu'on la re-
 queue très-peu serrée dans la main ou
 tire très-lestement à l'instant même où elle vient de
 frapper la bille.
     Si l'on se servait d'une queue un peu plus légère et
      pesant     guère  plus  de  deux  fois et demi la bille,
 ne
  alors en la tenant toujours peu serrée dans la main, on
  peut, sans détruire la rotation rétrograde, frapper
 jusqu'à la plus grande distance en-dessous du centre
                                       le bout de la queue ne
  que permet la condition que
  glisse pas sous le coup, c'est-à-dire à o,7o du rayon.
  Si la queue est plus pesante ou si elle a moins d'élasticité,
                                                            bras
  ou ce qui revient au même, si le joueur y son
                                                     lie
                                        enfin s'il la pousse en-
  en la serrant dans sa main, ou
  core après le choc; la
                               rotation rétrograde commen-
         à  être  détruite pour   une distance bien moindre
  cera
en dessous du centre ainsi on n'obtiendra alors que
des effets de reculement bien moins sensibles.
   Si l'on veut exprimer 1. d'une manière analogue
à ye, il suffit de changer dans cette dernière quantité
le facteur i     Ra en      (      I On trouve ainsi
qu'avec une vitesse donnée pour la queue la distance
y, sera un maximum, c'est-à-dire que la bille ira le
plus loin possible avant d'être il l'état final de roule-
ment, si l'on frappe la bille en-dessous dit centre à
une distances égale au dixième du rayon. Dans cette
circonstance on a

ce qui donne pour un fort coup de queue répondant à

et pour un coup de queue ordinaire répondant à

  La manière dont les distances^ et yy varient avec
la hauteur du choc l, lorsque le coup de queue est
donné dans le plan vertical du centre, est représentée
dans la figure 10, par les ordonnées horizontales LI,
LQ des courbes ITTO et Q'QN. Le cercle, dont MR est
le diamètre, représente dans une dimension forcée un
grand cercle vertical de la bille dans le plan du choc.
Pour un coup de queue donnée à une hauteur L; la
distance horizontale LQ prise égale à MQ de la fig. 6,
représente la distance j%, et la distance LI, prise
égale à MI de la figure 6, représente la distancer.
La première est nulle pour         R; la seconde l'est
pour 1 R. Les maxima de ces distances répondent
le ier. àR– Z = o,ioR, et le 2e. à R /=:o,25R.
  Les ordonnées LK de la courbe K'KK"K" repré-
sentent dans cette même figure t o les distances MK de
la fig. 6 c'est-à-dire que cette courbe marque les
places des extrémités K des paraboles pour les diffé-
rentes valeurs de l.
                Du coup de queue incliné.
  Si l'on tient la queue un peu inclinée, mais que le
plan vertical du choc passe par le centre, le mouve-
ment de la bille se fera toujours en ligne droite avec
toutes les circonstances que nous venons d'indiquer
seulement le choc de la bille contre le tapis diminue
la vitesse de translation et augmente la rotation di-
recte ou diminue la rétrograde. Dans ce cas, pour que
la queue ne continue pas de toucher la bille après le
choc, il faut que la ligne du choc reste moins éloignée
du centre que lorsque la queue est tenue horizontale.
   Si la ligne du choc étant toujours inclinée, le plan
vertical du choc ne passe pas par le centre la bille
commencera par décrire une portion de parabole
avec un mouvement varié, après lequel elle prendra
son état final de roulement en suivant la tangente à
cette courbe.
   La direction de cette dernière tangente ne dépend
nullement de l'intensité du frottement du tapis sur la
bille.Pour avoir cette direction, on concevra (fi, 34)
la ligne du choc T'R' prolongée jusqu'à ce qu'elle
rencontre le tapis en R' en projection verticale, et en
R en projection horizontale; on tirera sur le tapis
une ligne allant du point d'appui A de la bille à ce
point R de rencontre, on aura ainsi une direction
AR, parallèle à celle du mouvement de la bille dans
son état final.
   Ainsi guand on ne frapperu la bille rzi horizonta-
lement, ni de manière que le plan vertical du cizoc passe
par le centre, elle décrira une courbe en se déviant de la
directions du choc du côté où elle
                                       a été frappée sa
marche firzale sera parallèles à la ligne menée du point
d'appui au poirzt oit la ligne du choc devra rencontrer
le tapis.
   L'étendue de la courbe décrite dépend de l'intensité
du frottement de la bille sur le tapis, pendant le choc
et après le choc, ainsi que de la force du coup. Il est
facile de tracer cette courbe; il suffit de construire
son point extrême L par où doit passer la marche
finale LV parallèle à AR.
   On marquera d'abord sur le tapis le point P, qui est
la projection de celui où la ligne du choc va percer
le plan horizontal mené par le centre supérieur de
percussion N on tracera du centre A la direction AP;
cela fait, on tracera la droite AB, représentant en
grandeur et en direction la projection horizontale de
la vitesse W, = DB que le centre de la bille prendrait
par l'effet des coups de queue si le coup était hori-
zontal, ainsi que la donne la courbe de la figure 4.
On tracera par le point B, BE paralléle à AP, jusqu'à
sa rencontre E avec AR prolongé.
   Pour avoir la direction de la vitesse initiale AB' du
centre de la bille, on prendra sur AE à partir de B une
longueur BB' égale kf W, sin. p., en appelan ^l'angle
DBA que fait la ligne du choc avec l'horizontale. Pour
cela on prendra BS =/'W, =3 £ BD, puisque/7 = 0,20;

f
on projettera S en G, et on rapportera BG ou
   W, sin. de B en e. Ayant la vitesse initiale AB' et
la direction AR ou AE de la vitesse finale, on aura le
point extrême L de la courbe par la construction de la
figure i. Ainsi on prendra le point M sur le milieu
de B'E, on joindra AM, qui déjà contiendra le point L.
Il s'obtiendra sur cette ligne en prenant AL, de ma-
nière que le rapport de AL à AM soit égal à celui de
B'E à la longueur/g-, qui, en prenant ici/– 0,2 5, est
2,45, ou égal à celui de B'Mà 1, 225. Il ne restera donc
pour avoir la marche de la bille qu'a mener par L une
ligne LV parallèle à AR, et à tracer entre A et L une
parabole tangente en A et en L aux droites AB' et LV.
   Si la distancehorizontale AP du centre de percussion
à la ligne du choc était égale ou inférieure à s f R, la
bille au lieu de commencer par glisser au point d'ap-
pui, roulerait de suite sous le coup de queue en pre-
nant toujours la direction AR donnée par la construc-
tion précédemment indiquée pour l'état final, lors
 même qu'elle décrit d'abord une portion de parabole.
    Si la bille ressautait après le coup de queue, il fau-
 drait augmenter BB' dans le rapport de la vitesse ren-
 due à la vitesse perdue, et ensuite reporter l'origine
 A de la courbe sur AU, au point où la bille retombe
 sur le tapis.
Du mouvement d'une bille après un premier ou un deuxième choc
                  contre une autre bille.
   Je poserai d'abord les définitions suivantes
   La bille adverse. C'est la bille immobile que la bille
du joueur va choquer.
   Point de choc. C'est le point de contact des billes à
l'instant du choc.
    Point d'arrière. C'est le point de la bille adverse
contre laquelle la bille du joueur vient choquer quand
la direction du mouvement du centre de cette der-
nière va passer par le centre de cette bille adverse.
    Angle de la déviation initiale. C'est l'angle que font
les directions du mouvement de la bille du joueur
avant le choc, et immédiatement après le choc: nous
le désignerons par cp.
    Angle de la déviation fznalc. Ce sera J'angle que fait
la vitesse de la bille du joueur dans son étatfinal après
le choc avec la direction de son mouvement avant le
choc nous le désignerons par ty.
    En vertu de ce que le frottement entre deux billes
pendant le choc conserve une direction constante
ainsi qu'on le démontre, on établit facilementles équa-
tions de leur mouvement après le choc. Mais, pour la
 plupart des cas ordinaires du jeu, on peut négliger
 lefrottement. Il résulteen effet, de diverses expériences
 qu'on trouvera décrites au troisième chapitre, qu'il
 ne peut donner qu'une quantité de mouvement d'en-
 viron o,o3 de celle qui se produit au point de choc.
 Ce frottement n'a d'influence sensible sur la direction
 finale du mouvement de la bille du joueur que dans
 le cas où elle a touché l'autre au point d'arrière ou
 très-près de ce point, et qu'encore la queue a frappé
 sur le côté, c'est-à-dire que le plan vertical du choc
 n'a pas passé parle centre. Quant au mouvement de
 la bille adverse, il n'est jamais influencé que d'une
 manière très-peu sensible par le frottement au contact.
     Si l'on commence donc par traiter le mouvement
 de la bille du joueur en négligeant le frottement en-
  tre les billes pendant le choc, et en admettant une
  élasticité parfaite entre les billes, ainsi que l'expérience
 prouve qu'on peut le faire avec une grande exacti-
  tude, on arrive à la construction suivante
    On prend dans la figure 6 les longueurs AD et AH
 répondant à la manière dont le coup de queue a été
 donné, et à la place D où se trouve la bille adverse
 sur le tapis au moment du choc; le point M étant
 celui où la bille du joueur a reçu le coup de queue,
 et la droite PE étant menée comme on l'a dit à la hau-
 teur MP =3 MC. Si le choc a lieu au delà de Q, ces
 distances seront A'D' et A'H'.
    On décrira un cercle sur AD comme diamètre
 (fîg. 6), on tirera la corde AB dans la direction de la
tangente horizontale menée au point où se fera le
 choc sur la bille adverse, c'est-à-dire qu'on placera le
point B à une distance angulaire de A, qui soit le dou-
ble de celle AT qu'il y a entre le point de choc T et
le point d'arrière A. La ligne HB donnera dans tous
les cas la direction de la marche finale de la bille du
joueur, parrapport à la direction AD prise pour celle
de son mouvement avant le choc. La position de cette
marche finale s'obtiendra en construisant l'extré-
mité L de la parabole, comme on l'a indiqué sur la
figure i, où les longueurs AH et AB répondent aux
longueurs AH et AB de la figure 6. Cette construction
se trouve reproduite sur la figure (, où l'on a con-
                                     1
serve les mêmes lettres que dans la figure
                                                    i. Au
moyen du cercle dont AD est le diamètre, la con-
struction se trouve préparée pour toutes les posi-
tions du point du choc. Le point M est aussi
                                                  sur un
cercle, puisque MB =      FB; mais ce cercle a un centre
différent de celui sur lequel se trouve le point B.
    Ayant le point L, extrémité de la courbe, on fera pas-
 ser par ce point une parallèle LV à HB; on aura ainsi
 la marche finale de la bille. La parabole décrite se tra-
 cera facilement par la condition qu'elle soit tangente
 en A et en L aux directions initiale et finale AB et LV.
    La figure \i représente la même construction
 quand le choc se fait à l'état de rotation rétrograde,
 et qu'alors le point H tombe entre A et D. La bille du
joueur peut alors marcher dans toutes les directions
 après le choc elle recule en revenant vers lejoueur,
si l'arc AB n'est pas trop grand, c'est-à-dire si,
                                                        en
prenant    le  cercle ABD pour représenter le grand
cercle horizontal de la bille le point de choc T n'est
pas trop éloigné du point d'arrière A.
   La figure 13 montre les mêmes constructions quand
le choc se fait dans l'état final alors la plus grande dé-
viation que puisse prendre la bille est de 33°-44'; elle
s'obtient en dirigeant le centre de la bille du joueur à
très-peu près vers le bord apparent de la bille adverse,
le point de choc devant être à 2 7°-6' du point d'arrière.
   Si l'on suppose que la bille du joueur, après avoir
choqué une première bille en un point distant du point
d'arrière d'une quantité angulaire égale à l'angle sou-
tendu par AT sur le cercle ATD (fig. i5 ), vienne en
choquer une deuxième très-près de la première et
que le point de choc soit à une distance angulaire
égale à l'angle soutendu par AT' sur le cercle ATB;
alors, en tirant la corde AB dans le premier cercle et
la corde AB' dans celui qui a AB pour diamètre, les-
quelles répondent à des arcs doubles des arcs AT et
AT'; la ligne HB' donnera toujours la direction finale
du mouvement de la bille du joueur après le deuxième
choc; les élémens AB' et AH serviront à construire la
parabole décrite et à trouver le point L, ainsi qu'on
l'a fait sur la figure.
   La courbe enveloppe des cercles AB'B, pour toutes
les positions du point B (fig. 6 ) est une épicycloïde
engendrée par un cercle roulant sur un cercle égal;
ce dernier ayant pour diamètre le rayon AR du cercle
ADB, c'est-à-dire la moitié de la vitesse W. Les tan-
gentes menées à cette courbe par le point H donne-
ront pour un certain rapport, entre les vitesses AD
et AH, les plus grandes déviations que pourra prendre
la bille du joueur après le deuxième choc, de quelque
manière que soient placées l'une par rapport à l'autre
les deux billes supposées très-voisines, et quels que
soient les points de choc. Quand la bille du joueur
est à l'état final au moment du choc, le plus grand
angle de déviation finale est de 5i°-34'.
   La figure i4 indique les modifications qu'il fau-
drait faire si les billes n'étaient pas parfaitement
élastiques ou, ce qui vient à peu près au même si
leurs masses n'étaient pas parfaitement égales. On
remplacerait le cercle ABD parle cercle A'B'D ayant
un diamètre moindre de la longueur AA', qui repré-
sente, par rapport à AD, la vitesse normale conser-
vée après le choc par le centre de la bille du joueur.
   La figure 18 indique cette même modification pour
le cas d'un deuxième choc tout près du premier.
   On répétera qu'on a considéré ces cas comme com-
plément de théorie seulement, puisque l'élasticité
peut être regardée comme parfaite.
   S'il y a inégalité de masse et que ce soit la bille du
joueur qui soit la plus forte, alors on n'aura qu'à
appliquer la construction précédente             i/\). Si
elle est la plus légère, alors la portion de vitesse
I3B' Ifig. 1 4 te') devra seulement être changée de sens.
   La figure 17 indique la construction pour le cas où
le deuxième choc aurait lieu à une distance sensible
du premier, et où les élémens AB, AH auraient eu le
temps de changer dans le trajet de la première à la
deuxième bille. Alors AB et AH ou son égal et paral-
lèle BD' seraient devenus AB', B'D' ou son égal AH';
la distance BB' s'obtenant comme on l'a indiclué par
la figure 3. Pour avoir alors la marche de la bille
après le deuxième choc pour toutes les positions du
point T' du deuxième choc, on décrira le cercle sur
AB'; on y tracera une corde AB" qui, étant la vitesse
W après le deuxièmechoc, servira avec AH' à trouver
par la construction ordinaire l'extrémité L de la pa-
rabole.
   Bien que le frottement entre les billes soit presque
insensible, il y a des cas où il est nécessaired'y avoir
égard c'est lorsque le choc a lieu très-près du point
d'arrière, etque la bille du joueur, choquant très-peu
avant ou après l'état de glissement, n'a presque pas de
vitesse de rotation, et qu'elle perd ainsi par le choc
presque toute sa vitesse de translation. Le frottement
alors influe sensiblement sur cette vitesse qui devient
très-faible.
    Comme la méthode pour avoir égard au frottement
 n'est pas plus compliquée pour un cas quelconque,
 nous donnerons ici la construction générale (fig. 20 ).
 AD représente la vitesse W de la bille au moment du
 choc, et AF la vitesse du point supérieur laquelle
 est égale f AH. T représente le point de choc sur
 le cercle ABD considéré comme le grand cercle de
la bille. On tracera comme dans les figures précédentes
la corde AB soutendant l'arc double de AT. On dé-
crira un cercle DGA'surundiamètre DA'– DA-f/'DA,
f' étant le coefficient de frottement. On décrira sur FD
un cercle FKD; on joindra DB qui coupele cercle DKF
en K; on prolongera la ligne DE jusqu'au cercle DGA'
en G. On prendra, sur AB du côté où le coup de queue
a été donné, une longueur égale à         W,    elle sera
égale à une ordonnée PR de la courbe 0R R'R" (fig. 8)
si l'on a l–R, les abscisses OP, OP' étant les dis-
tances h. Ayant joint KC, on tracera par le point B la
ligne BB" égale à DG et dans la direction parallèle à
celle qui va de K vers C le point B" sera celui qu'il fau-
dra substituer à B pour que la droite HB" donne la direc-
tion de la marche finale de la bille lorsqu'on aura égard
au frottement. On voitque,dans le cas de la rotation
directe, son effet est d'augmenter la déviation finale.
   Si l'on veut la courbe décrite et le point extrême L
par lequel passe la marche finale, il faudra avoir sépa-
rément les deux élémens W et w après le choc, c'est-
à-dire qu'il faudra savoir ce que deviennent les vites-
ses AB et AH. Pour cela, on projettera B" sur AB
en B'; il suffira de substituer B' à B, et AB' sera la
nouvelle vitesse à substituer à AB. Pour obtenir la
nouvelle vitesse AH, on transportera le point H
                                                       en
H', d'une grandeur HB' égale et parallèle à B"B', et dans
le sens de B" vers B', c'est-à-dire dans
                                         un sens qui rap-
proche toujours H de AB.
   La figure 21 montre ce que devient cette
                                               construc-
tion si la rotation est rétrograde, et qu'ainsi H soit
intérieur au cercle dont AD est le diamètre. Dans ce
  cas, l'effet du frottement est de diminuer la dévia-
  tion finale. Ainsi en général quel que soit le
                                                   sens de
 la rotation, l'effet du frottement entre les billes
                                                       est
 de diminuer l'effet de la rotation, c'est-à-direde dimi-
 nuer l'angle que fait la direction finale avec la direc-
 tion initiale.
     Quant au mouvement de la bille adverse ayant
                                                 en
 égard au frottement (fig. 23 ), sa marche finale est
 parallèle à DB". La courbe qu'elle décrit est toujours
 insensible, parce que la direction finale fait
                                                 un angle
 très-petit d'un ordre supérieur avec la direction ini-
tiale, c'est-à-dire en le comparant à celui
                                                que cette
dernière fait avec la direction BD de la normale
point de choc.                                         au
    On voit que si le point de choc T est très-près du
point d'arrière A, labille du joueur se porte du côté où
tombe la direction CK, qui devient très-peu différente
de CF, c'est-à-dire qu'elle va du côté où le
                                                 coup de
queue a été donné et que la bille adverse fait le con-
traire.
    Si le choc se produit après
                                un premier choc qui ait
déjà changé AH" {flg. 22 ) en AH et AD
                                          en AD', et si la
distance entre les deux billes choquées est petite, de
manière qu'à l'instant du deuxième choc les élémens
soient encore AH et AD'; on partira de
                                           ces données et
l'on fera la même construction
                                    que précédemment;
seulement on remplacera F par un point F' pris
le prolongementde AH et sur celui de FF' perpendi-
                                                      sur
culaire à AD'. On obtiendra le point K
                                            en abaissant
de F' la perpendiculaire FK sur D'B et CK
                                                     sera
comme précédemment la direction qu'il faudra don-
ner à BB"=BG.
    Si le deuxième choc n'a
                              pas lieu très-près du pre-
mier, mais avant que la bille du joueur ne soit ve-
nue à l'état final et conséquemment pendant qu'elle
se meut encore en ligne courbe alors les élémens AH'
et AB' auront change dans l'intervalle; on les déter-
minera pour l'instant du deuxième choc comme le
comporte la construction de la figure 3 et ensuite on
opérera comme dans la figure 20.
   La figure 35 montre à l'échelle de o,o5 la marche
de la bille du joueur après un premier choc. Lorsque
le coup de queue a été donné horizontalement, mais
en dessous du centre on a pris les données suivantes
     = 2,00,             6,27;–= 0,40 R;
                ou W  =                    W =3,24
 cr                           m
et w t=!   2,00.
  Dans ce cas on a      = 0,535, et par suite

                      jo=i,8o

  Dans cette figure le choc des deux billes est sup-
posé se faire tout près du point de départ où s'est
donné le coup de queue.
  On a supposé que le point de choc se trouvait suc-
cessivement à  'k,   d'angle droit du point d'arrière.
Les marches correspondantes sont marquées des nu-
méros 2, 3 sur cette figure et sur les suivantes.
   Les figures 36 37, 33, 3g et 40 montrent les marches
de la bille du joueur après son choc contre une autre
bille en supposant que les élémens du coup de queue
restant les mêmes, le lieu du tapis où se fait le choc
s'éloigne successivementdu joueur, et qu'ainsi la dis-
tancer aille en croissant.
  Pour les figures 36 et 37 la distancey n'est
                                                  pas en.
core assez grande pour que la rotation au moment
du choc ne soit pas toujours rétrograde.
  Pour la figure 38, le choc se fait à l'état de glisse-
ment, c'est-à-dire à une distancer == 1,8o du point de
départ; dans ce cas il n'y a pas de courbes décrites.
  Dans la figure 39, le choc a lieu entre l'état de
                                                    cas-
sement et l'état final, c'est-à-dire pour
                    7>i,8oei<97.
   Dans la figure 4o, le choc
                                a lieu à l'état final c'est-
à-dir·e pour
                    jr = ou>i,97.
  La figure 41 présente les marches de la
                                              bille du
joueur, lorsque le coup de
                           queue a été donné en des-
sus du centre à une distance égale à la moitié du
rayon; la force du coup étant telle qu'on ait   par l'effet
du choc W, = 3,oo et w^o,5o W,
                                         ce qui répond à
          de
un coup queue capable de donner, en frappant
                                                        au
centre, une vitesse W.=4,26, ou -^«0,92. Le choc
est supposé avoir lieu tout près du départ. Les points
de choc sont choisis, comme précédemment,
                                                 de quart
en quart  d'angle droitsur la bille adverse.
   La figure 42 montre les marches après le choc
                                                         si
pour 1e même coup de queue le choc avait lieu
                                                  lorsque
la bille du joueur est arrivée à l'état final c'est-à-dire
lorsque
                     r=:ou>o,9o.
  Il suffit de ces exemples
                            pour montrer la nature des
marches de la bille, et pour faire voir
due des courbes décrites varie
                                        comment l'éten-
                                 avec les vitesses W  et u.
au moment du choc. On ne doit pas perdre
                                               de vue que
ces courbes sont d'autant moins prononcées que west
plus petit, et qu'elles disparaissent, c'est-à-dire qu'elles
deviennent des lignes droites, quand w=o.
    Les cercles qu'on voit tracés dans toutes les figures
de 35 à 42 inclusivement sont ceux auxquels il faut
mener des rayons vecteurs du centre de la bille du
joueur au moment du choc pour avoir les directions
finales de la marche de cette hille. Les points de choc
 étant pris de quart en quart de l'angle droit, on doit
mener ces rayons aux quatre quarts du demi-cercle.
Les points H des figures i, 12 et r3 ont été reportés
                            1

au centre de la bille du joueur au moment du choc;
 ces figures sont donc remontées ou
                                           abaissées de la
 hauteur AH pour que les parallèles aux marches
 finales partent du centrede bille au lieu de partiren
                                1

 arrière ou en avant, comme dansles figures il, 12, 13.
     Les figures de 43 à58 inclusivement se rapportent à la
 marche de la bille du joueur, lorsque, après avoir
 choqué une première bilie elle vient en choquer une
 seconde pendant qu'elle est encore à l'état varié, et
 qu'elle se meut en ligne courbe.
     Les figures 43, 44, 45, 46 et 4? se rapportent aux
 marches de la bille du joueur lorsque le coup de queue
                                                 à l'échelle
 a été donné très-bas. Elles supposent,
 de o°',05 par mètre, qu'on a, au moment du choc
 des billes, W = 3,24 et w =             2,00, c'est-à-dire
  qu'elles répondent à un premier choc semblable à
  celui qu'on a supposé pour la figure 35. Le premier
  choc répond à uu point de choc placé au quart de
  l'angle droit du point d'arrière, et la courbe décrite
  est la courbe numérotée i sur la figure 35.
    Pour avoir les différentes marches de la bille du
 joueur, suivant qu'en un lieu donné de sa course elle
 touchera la deuxième bille à diitërens points, il fau-
 dra d'abord décrire un cercle sur sa vitesse W
                                                   comme
 diamètre, et y mener des rayons vecteurs à partir     du
 point H; ou bien, ce qui est encore plus commode,
 supposer ce point H reporté au centre de la bille,
 comme on l'a fait sur la figure 43. Le cercle alors de-
 vra être décrit sur la vitesse AD, et le point H restera
 au centre de la bille du joueur. Si l'on veut répéter
 cette construction pour différens points de la marche
 de la laille, on examinera d'abord comment changent
 les élémens W et w ou AH et AD pendant
                                              que la bille
 marche en ligne courbe; c'est ce qu'on fait à l'aide de
 ce qui a été indiqué par les figures i et 3, dont le
 système de construction est reporté sur la figure 43.
 On y a décrit différens cercles auxquels
                                                  on doit
 mener des rayons vecteurs du point H, qui est ici le
 centre de la bille mobile. Dans la figure 44, ce
point H a été remis sur la courbe décrits les diffé-
rentes marches finales de la bille du joueurdevrontêtre

                     aux
dirigées suivant des parallèles aux rayons vecteurs
menées des points                     cercles ayant AD
AlDI, A"Dn, A"'D'n pour diamètres, et dont'les
                                                    som-
mets D, D', D", D"' seront sur la courbe DD'D"D"'
égale et parallèle à la courbe HH'H"H'' décrite        la
bille. Dans !e cas ou les vitesses ne sont         par
                                            pas très-for-
tes, les courbes après le deuxième choc étant peu
étendues, les marches diffèrent très-peu de
                                              ces rayons
vecteurs eux-mêmes.
   Dans le cas de ces figures, les secondes marches
seront toujours rétrogrades, puisque les cercles rcs-
tent en dessous des points H. On voit ces marches sur
les figures 45, 46 et 47» pour les deuxièmes chocs ayant
lieu en H', H" et 11"' de la courbe décrite. La figure 47
suppose que la bille du joueur est à l'extrémité de la
courbe en H" et qu'elle est ainsi à l'état final. Les
courbes uumérotées i 2 3, se rapportent au point de
choc situé à un, deux, trois quarts d'angle droit à
droite de la bille du joueur, et ces courbes i',z',3',
supposent le point de choc placé de même à gauche.
La courbe marquée o est toujours une droite; elle sup-
pose le point de choc au point d'arrière. La courbe 4
suppose que la bille adverse a été rasée sans être tou-
chée cette courbe est donc la continuation de la pa-
rabole décrite entre le premier et le deuxième choc.
    Lesfigures 48 et 49 montrent les constructions ana-
logues à celles des figures 41 et 42. Elles se rapportent
 au cas où le premier choc a lieu dans les circonstances
 de la figure 36; le point de ce premier choc étant
 distant du point d'arrière de ^d'angle droit, et la
 courbe décrite étant la courbe numérotée 3 sur cette
 figure 36. Dans ce cas, le centre de la bille, où l'on a
 reporté le point H comme précédemment, se trouvera
 d'abord au moment du départ en dedans du cercle
  qui lui correspond et auquel il faut mener les rayons
 vecteurs du point II pour avoir les directions finales.
  Ce point II se trouve ensuite sur ce cercle; puis, en
  dernier lieu, il en sort et reste dehors. Le point H est
  sur le cercle qui lui correspond lorsque l'angle A" IID
  est droit on a exprimé cette position sur ces figures.
     Les figures 5o, 5 1 et 52 représentent les marches
  de la bille du joueur, lorsque, en décrivant la courbe
  HH'H'H'" de la figure 49, elle rencontre une autre
bille de différentes manières, c'est-à-dire en la tou-
chant aux huit points déjà indiqués.
   Le cas de la figure 51 est celui qui répond au mo-
ment où les courbes cessent de prendre toutes les di.
rections possibles et commencent à se diriger d'un
seul côté.
   Dans la figure 52 le deuxième choc a lieu à l'état
final.
   Les figures 53 et 54 sont les analogues des figures 48
et 4g; le premier choc ayant lieu comme dans la
figure 42, c'est-à-dire dans l'état final, avec les vitesses
W = 3m,a4 etw=;W; la courbe décrite étant la

courbe numérotée sur cette figure 42.
   La figure 55 montre les courbes effectivement décri-
tes dans un deuxième choc très-près du premier.
   Les figures 56 et 57 répondent encore aux précé-
dentes 53 et 54, mais elles se rapportent à la courbe
numérotée 2 de la figure 42.
   La figure 58 montre les marches après un deuxième
choc, ayant lieu dans le trajet de cette courbe 2.
   La figure 59 montre les marches des billes, en ayant
égard au frottement entre elles, suivant qu'on don-
nera le coup de queue, soit dans le plan vertical du
centre, soit à droite, soit à gauche, à une distance du
centre A = om,25 R. L'effet du coup donné à droite
est marqué par un accent; celui du coup donné à
gauche par deux accens; la marche affectée de l'in-
dice o indique celle qu'on aurait si l'on n'avait pas
égard au frottement, ou si son effet était nul; ce qui
revient alors à supposer qu'on a frappé à droite à une
distance du centre] qui soit telle qu'on ait
  On a supposé, dans la figure 5g, que le frottement
était de om,o5; ainsi on l'a pris plus fort qu'il n'est
réellement, afin de rendre son effet plus sensible.
   La figure 60 montre l'influence semblable dans le
choc pour l'état final, tel qu'il a été donné par la fi-
gure 42.
   On voit en même temps dans ces deux dernières
figures les marches de la bille adverse, en ayant égard
au frottement; elles diffèrent peu de la normale au
point de choc. Le frottement ayant toujours été pris
de o,mo5 de la pression, tandis qu'il n'en est guère que
les om,o3, les effets ont été un peu forces aussi sur ces
marches pour les montrer plus distinctement.
   Il faut bien faire attention que les directions fina-
les que donnent toutes les figures d'applications, res-
teront les mêmes pour les mêmes rapports de gran-
deur et de direction entre les deux vitesses W et w,
c'est-à-dire AB et AH, au moment du choc; mais que,
quant à l'étendue et aux dimensions des courbes dé-
crites et conséquemment aux positions des droites qui
donnent ces marches finales, elles ne changeront pas
proportionnellementaux grandeurs des vitesses, mais
bien à leurs carrés ou bien aux aires des triangles
 compris entre les vitesses.
    Ainsi, avec de très-forts coups de queue, l'étendue
 des courbes présentées dans ces figures à l'échelle de
 om,o5 par mètre pour de faibles coups de queue, de-
 viendraient beaucoup plus considérables, toutes cho-
 ses restant de même. Si donc on eût voulu représenter
 les marches effectives des billes pour différentes forces
 du coup de queue, il eût fallu changer les courbes, ce
 qui eût entraîné dans un nombre très-considérable de
 dessins. Les exemples qu'on a donnés ici dans cet ou-
vrage ne sont pas destinés à présenter toutes les mar-
ches, mais plutôt à donner une idée de leur variété.
  Toutes ces courbes après le deuxième choc, ainsi
que celles qui sont décrites après le premier choc,
diminuent d'étendue avec la vitesse de rotation w au
moment du second choc et disparaissent toujours
quand le choc a lieu à l'état de glissement, c'est-à-dire
quand w  =   o.
   Toutes les marches représentées par les figures de
35 à 58 inclusivement, supposent qu'on néglige 1 in-
fluence du frottement entre les billes. Cela ne fait pas
une erreur sensible c'est ce qu'on voit par les fi-
gures 5g et 60, où l'on a eu égard à cette influence
en l'augmentant.
Mouvement d'une bille après un premier ou un deuxième choc
                      contre la bande.
   Nous supposerons d'abord que la bille arrive contre
la bande après avoir reçu un coup de queue horizon-
tal que A Y (fîg. 2/{) soit une parallèle à la bande menée
par le centre de la bille au moment du choc; que AD
soit la vitesse W du centre, et AH la vitesse W du centre
de percussion inférieure ces grandeurs AD et AH
étant prises comme il résulte de la figure 6, suivant le
coup de queue et la distance de la bande au point où
ce coup a été donné.
   Pour avoir la direction du mouvement final de
la bille après le choc, on commencera par abaisser
du point D la perpendiculaire DOB à la bande
on prendra ensuite 013     =     EOD; OB étant ainsi la
vitesse normale rendue par la bande à la place de la
vitesse perdue OD. La direction de la vitesse de la
 bille après le choc serait celle qui va du point A au
 point B sans l'influence du frottement entre la bille et
 la bande pendant le choc. Pour tenir compte de
 frottement, on reportera le point B en B" dans ce
                                                     une
 direction BB" qu'on va indiquer. On prendra
 la grandeur de BB" une fraction de DB représentée
                                                   pour
 par le coefficient/ du frottement pour le choc contre
 la bande, en sorte qu'on aura BB"=/ DB la valeur de
/ayant été déterminée par expérience de 0,20, on
 aura AB"= jDB. La direction de la marche finale de la
bille après le choc sera celle de la ligne HB".
   Pour avoir la direction de la ligne BB", abaissera
                                            on
de F sur DO une perpendiculaireFK, c'est-à-dire
parallèle à la bande; puis on prendra               une
                                           sur la ligne
AY une distance AC égale à Rr             W.s, c'est-à-dire
                                  ou à
à la vitesse horizontale des points de l'équateur hori-
zontal de la bille. Cette vitesse étant donnée lorsque
1=R au moyen de h par une ordonnée PR (fig. 8) ré-
pondant à une abscisse OP = h. La longueur AC devra
être portée du côté où la bille été frappée
                                      a              par la
queue, c'est-à-dire du côté de Y, si la queue a frappe
à droite du centre, et du côté opposé si la
frappé gauche. La direction allant de K queue Ca
                                                    vers
sera  celle qu'on  donnera à la ligne BB" de B en B".
   Si, en outre de la direction HB" de la marche finale,
on veut l'extrémité L de la courbe décrite; point par
lequel il faut faire passer la parallèle à cette direction
HB" pour avoir la marche finale; alors
                                            on projettera
BB" en B' sur
               une parallèle BB' à la bande; on transpor-
tera ensuite H en H' d'une dislance HH' =s B"B' dans
une direction perpendiculaire à la bande, et toujours
en s'en rapprochant, c'est-à-dire toujours dans le sens
de B" vers B'; les droites AB' et ll.Ft' serortt les deux
élérnens W et w du mouvement après le choc. L'effet
du frottement de la bille contre la bande
                                              sera de
transporter les points B et H en B' et en H'.
   On obtiendra comme à l'ordinaire la position du
point L, extrémité de la courbe décrite. Il suflira de
se reporter à la construction de la figure i, en faisant
attention que le point F de cette figure s'obtiendra
en prenant AF' opposé à AH' et égal à AH' ou ce qui
revient au même, cu prolongeant H'A jusqu'à la
                                                     ren-
contre de FF' mené perpendiculairementà la bande.
   On peut remarquer que lorsqu'on voudra s'occuper
d'un deuxième choc contre la bande, après premier
                                              un
choc déjà effectué aussi contre la bande, il faudra avoir
pour ce deuxièmechoc la valeur de la vi tesse de rotation
horizontale Rrdes points de l'équateur horizontal, la-
quelle est W- avant le premier choc. Cette vitesse
Rr, par l'effet du frottement dû choc,
                                au      sera diminuée
ou augmentée de la quantité BB' c'est-à-dire
                                             que pour
avoir la nouvelle valeur AC' à substituer à AC
                                                 pour
un deuxième choc contre une autre bande, il faudra
transporter le point C en C', de laquantité CC'^BB'
et dans le sens de B' vers B.
   Dans la figure 25, on voit que la vitesse de rotation
Rr étant en sens contraire, c'est-à-dire de gauche à
droite, l'effet du choc, avançant le point C
                                              en C', dimi-
nuera cette vitesse Rr.
   Dans le cas où le choc a lieu dans 1'étatfinal, le point
K se confond avec le point D, et AH devient égal à
  AD. Ce cas est représenté
                               sur la figure a6.
   Le choc ayant toujours lieu dans l'état final, si le
coup de queue a été donné de manière que le plan
vertical du choc passe par le centre de la bille, c'est-
à-dire de manière que l'on ait /i=î o et par suite
AC = o, et que toujours le choc contre la bande se
fasse dans l'étatfinal; alors le point C (fig. 27) reste en
A, et la direction KC devient celle de DA.
   Si le choc a lieu pendant la rotation rétrograde
aiors les pointsH et F sont placés, le premieren dehors
du billard, et le deuxième en dedans la construction
se fait de mêmes, comme on le voit sur la fig. 28; le
point K se construira de même en abaissant de F la
perpendiculaire FK à DB prolongé. HB" sera toujours
la direction finale du mouvement de la bille, et AH'
et AB' les deux élémens qui servirontàdétermiuerla
courbe décrite et son extrémité L.
   Si la bille vient toucher la bandeaprès avoir déjà cho-
qué une première bille, et assez près du point ou le
premier choc a eu lieu pour qu'elle soit encore à l'état
varié au moment du choc; alors les élémens AD et
AH ou AF, au moment du choc contre la bande, fieront
un angle entre  eux         ng). Ayant pris le point F sur
la direction opposée à AH, de manière que AF = AH,
on suivra la même construction que précédemment.
On abaissera de F la perpendiculaire FK sur DB pro-
longé, ce qui donnera le point K, qui s'emploiera
comme dans les constructions précédentes.
    La figure 3o montre la même construction pour le
 choc contre la bande dans l'état varié, mais lorsque
 la rotation est rétrograde.
    Dans la figure 3i on a traité le même cas que dans
 la figure 29, mais en supposant les données telles, que
 la bille du joueur revienne toucher la bande avant
 même qu'elle ait fini de décrire la portion de courbe
 AL. Ces données sont les vitesses ah -=w, «rf–W,
              etRr = ^W = AG
                               au moment du premier choc
contre la bille. Ce premier choc change ad en ad' sans
changer sensiblement ni ahxi'i AC=R, mais pendant
le petit trajet que parcourt labille du joueur de a enA,
les élémens ah et ad! ont un peu changé et sont deve-
nus AH et AD d'après le mode de construction de la
figure 3. Le choc contre la bande change ces dernières
en AH' et AU, d'aprcs la construction expliquée ci-
dessus.En cherchantl'extrémité L de la courbe décrite
d'après la construction ordinaire qui est tracée sur
cette figures, on trouve ce point L derrière la bande:
ainsi la bille la choque une deuxième fois avant d'avoir
achevé sa courbe. Il faut, pour être dans cette condi-
tion, que AH soit grand, ce qui suppose qu'on a frappé
un peu haut avec la queue, et que AC soit assez grand,
et du côté où il est dans la figure ce qui exige que Ion
ait frappé à gauche du centre. Enfin i faut que la bille
adverse qu'on va choquer d'abord soit très-près de la
bande, pour que dans le trajet de rz en A jusqu'à la
bande les élémens rah et rzd n'aient pas beaucoup
changé.
    Si l'on veut traiter un deuxième choc contre la
bande, on le fera comme pour le premier, à cela près
 qu'après avoir employé les grandeurs convenables
 pour les vitesses AD, AF et AH, il faudra avoir égard
 au changement que AC a subi par l'effet du premier
 choc. La nouvelle distance AC à employer s'obtiendra
 comme on l'a déjà indiqué (fîg. il\ et 25) en déplaçant
 le point C en C' d'une longueur CC' = B'B et dans le
 sens de B' vers B.
    Si l'on veut examiner en général l'influence du
 changement de certains élémens du mouvement de la
hille avant le choc contre la bande sur son mouvement
après le choc voici comment on le fera au moyen
des constructions qu'on vient d'indiquer.
  Si d'abord on change seulement les élémens qui se
rapportent à la rotation, soit horizontale, soit verti-
cale, c'est-à-dire si l'on change AH et h.C(fîg. 32) sans
 changerla vitesse AD du centre, il n'en résultera qu'un
 changement dans la position du point H et dans la
direction de BB" le point B et la grandeur de BB" ne
changeront pas; le point B" se déplacera sur un
demi-cercle décrit autour de B, du côté opposé à la
bande si la rotation est directe, et du côté de la bande
si la rotation est rétrograde, comme on le voit dans la
figure 32. Si l'on change AC seul, c'est-à-diresi le coup
de queue donné à la même hauteur se porte plus ou
moins à droite ou à gauche du centre de la bille du
joueur, le point H reste le même et le point B" seul se
transporte sur le cercle dont on vient de parler. On
voit donc ainsi sur la figure dans quelles limites la
rotation Rr, c'est-à-dire la valeur de h, peut faire
varier la direction finale HB".
    Si l'on change l'angle d'incidence, c'est-à-direl'angle
de la vitesse AD avec la bande sans changer la gran-
deur de cette vitesse; alors les points D, F et II reste-
ront sur des quarts de cercles, et le point K étant à la
rencontre de la perpendiculaire DO à la bande avec la
parallèle FK à cette bande, se trouvera sur un quart
d'ellipse dont les demi-axes seront AD et AF cette
ellipse sera du côté de AD si la rotation est directe, et
du côté du billard si la rotation est rétrograde.
    Quant aux différentes positions du point B pour
différens angles d'incidence (fig. 33), s'il y avait un
rapport constant   E
                        entre les vitesses normales à la
bande, avant et aprés le choc, il suffirait, pour obtenir
ces différentes positions, de décrire un quart d'ellipse
b bi b, payant AY ou AD pour demi-grand axe et
A b =    e
           AD pour demi-petit axe.
   Or, il résulte d'expériences assez soignées que le
coefficient e varie de o,50, pour de fortes vitesses,
à 0,60 pour de très-petites vitesses. Les ordonnées de
la courbe AM (Jîg. 33 bis) représentent les valeurs
des vitesses rendues, les abscisses étant les vitesses
perdues. On voit que cette courbe est presque une
ligne droite, et qu'on pourrait sans grande erreur re-
garder e comme constant et égal à o,55.
   En raison de la petite variation du rapport entre
la vitesse normale rendue par la bande et la vitesse
normale avant le choc, cette ellipse devra être un peu
altérée. Pour le faire, on se servira de la loi que nous
avons établie par expérience, et qui est représentée
par la figure 33 bis, où les abscisses AX représententles
vitesses normales OD avant le choc, et les ordonnées
les vitesses rendues OB l'échelle étant de o"02 pour
mètre. Ayant pris une abscisse AX dans cette figure
33 bégaie à AD ou AX de la fig. 33, et ayant tiré l'or-
donnée MX correspondante, on tracera une droite An
qui donne le plus petit écart maximum avec la courbe
 entre les points A et M. On décrira ensuite une ellipse
 dans la figure 33, qui répondra à la supposition où
la courbe AM serait remplacée par la droite An, c'est-
à-dire une ellipse dont le petit axe soit Ab = X n.
Les ordonnées de cette ellipse perpendiculaire à la
bande, devront être altérées dans la même proportion
 que les ordonnées de la droite An (fig.Z3bis),
                                                   quand
 on veut passer à la courbe AM. Cette altération est
 opérée dans la figure 33 sur la courbe B B B B,.
Le point B sera donc toujours        la rencontre de la
perpendiculaire DB à la bande avec cette courbe. On
pourra au reste, sans grandeerreur, lui substituer l'el-
lipse en prenant la valèur moyenne de e qui répond à
l'étendue des valeurs des vitesses normales de zéro à
AX ou AD.
   Quant à la longueur BB", elle sera toujours la dis-
tance DB réduite dans le rapport^ qui exprime le
frottement de la bille contre la bam'e.
   Le coeflicient f, ayant été trouvé assez constant et
 égal à 4-, on aura ces distances BB" en prenant le cin-
quième des ordonnées DB. Si l'on regarde B comme
étant sur une ellipse, ce qui n'occasionera qu'une
très-petite erreur, alors les longueurs BB" seront les
distances BG, B.G, B,G B3 G3, entre l'ellipse BB,
B2 B3 et une autre ellipse GGGGjj
                                         on n'aura qu'à
tourner les distances BG, B G,, B, G,, B, G3, pour les
mettre dans les directions KC K,C, K, C, K, C, qui
leur correspondent.
   On a indique par les figures de 61 à 67 inclusive-
ment divers cas de choc contre la bande.
   Dans la figure 61, on a supposé que la bille du joueur
avait reçu un faible coup de queue capable de donner
W'
    o 0,46 ou Wo = 3,oo, et qu'ayant frappé en

  dessous du centre d'une quantité égale o,5o R, on a
alors W, t=; 2,00 et w–     1,oo. Le plan vertical du
choc est supposé passer par le centre de la bille. Le
choc contre la bande est supposé avoir lieu tout près
du coup de queue.
  Dans la figure 62, le même coup de queue est sup-
posé avoir été donné plus loin de la bande, de manière
que, au moment du choc, on a W = i,3o et w=- 0,30
alors la rotation rétrograde est beaucoup plus faible.
Ce rapport plus faible entre la vitesse de rotation et
celle de translation pouvant avoir lieu au moment du
choc après un coup de queue donné moins en dessous
du centre, si la bande est plus rapprochée, on peut
dans ce cas donner ce coup un peu à droite ou à gauche
du centre. C'est ce qui a faitqia'on aconstruitdans cette
figure, pour chaque angle d'incidence, trois marches
réfléchies, suivant que le plan vertical du choc est à
droite du centre, sur le centre même, et à gauche
du centre elles sont réunies par un petit arc de cer-
cle. Les numéros sans accent répondent au coup
par le centre, les simples accens au coup donné
à droite, et les accens doubles au coup donné à gau-
che. L'écart la entre le plan de choc et le centre
est supposé d'environ o,5o R. Si ce plan de choc est
moins éloigné du centre on aura des marches inter-
médiaires.
   La figure 63 répond au cas où la bande étant encore
plus éloignée du lieu où le même coup de queue a été
donné, la bille est à l'état de glissement quand elle
la choque: alors il n'y a pas de courbe décrite, la
bille est réfléchie en ligne droite. Mais elle peut l'être
dans deux systèmes de directions; les premières sont
marquées par un accent, et les deuxièmes par deux
accens. Les premières marches auront lieu quand on
aura
ou   ce qui revient au même  quand le point K de la
figure de construction, qui alors se confond avec le
point 0 tombera plus près du joueur que le point C.
Les deuxièmes marches marquées de deux accens au-
ront lieu quand on aura
                 W,
                    4<Wcos.
                                  o,
c'est-à-dire quand le point 0 tombera plus loin du
joueur que le point C. Quand ces deux points nesont
pas tout-à-fait l'un sur l'autre, mais qu'ils sont peu
éloignés, alors il y a une modification à faire aux con-
structions pour avoir la marche intermédiaire. Nous
renverrons pour cela à ce qui est développé au chapi-
tre VIf.
   La figure 64 présente le choc contre la bande après
le même coup de queue, mais en supposant cette
bande encore plus éloignée de manière que la bille
soit à l'état final de roulement quand elle la choque.
On n'a représenté dans cette figure que les courbes
répondant au cas où le plan vertical du coup de
 queue a passé par le centre. On voit que ces courbes
sont très-peu étendues en raison de !a diminution
des vitesses.
   La figure 65 se rapporte à un choc contre la bande
après un coup de queue donné en dessus du centre et
lorsque la bande est très-prés du lieu où le coup de
queue a été donné en sorte que la vitesse de rotation
 est directe et assez grande. La figure à l'échelle sup-
 pose, au moment du choc, W = 3,oo etrv= i,5o
 ce qui entraîne                                Les trois
 marches réunies par un arc de cercle ponctué ré-
 pondent à un même angle d'incidence. Celle dont
le numéro ne porte pas d'accent répond au cas où le
plan vertical du choc passe par le centre de la bille.
Celle dont le numéro est affecté d'un accent répond
                                              dont*le
au coup de queue donné à droite, et celle
numéro est affecté de deux accens répond au] coup
donné à gauche.
   La figure 66 répond au même coup de queue, mais
en supposant la bande un peu plus éloignée,"de ma-
nière que la bille est arrivée à l'état final au moment
du choc. Elle suppose, à l'échelle, W am,8o et
w=7 W. Les accens distinguent les trois positions du
plan vertical du choc de la queue.
   La figure 67 présente un exemple d'un deuxième
choc contre la bande, très près d'un premier choc
contre une bille. Elle suppose qu'on a donné le coup
de queue un peu haut pour accroître cette rotation
directe et mettre la bille à l'état final au moment du
premier choc. La force du coup de queue aurait donné
au moment du premier choc contre la bille W = 3",23
et w W. La bille adverse a été choquée à un quart
d'angle droit du point d'arrière.
   On voit les trois marches répondant aux trois po-
sitions du plan vertical du coup de queue comme
dans les figures précédentes. Après le ricochet, la
marche répondant au coup de queue à gauche devient
parallèle à la bande.
   La figure 68 montre l'effet d'un coup de queue in-
cliné, lequel est dirigé comme l'indiquent les flèches
qui en représentent les projections. Il est supposé assez
fort pour qu'étant donné horizontalementet au centre
il aurait pu produire une vitesse de 7m,oo c'est-à-dire
celle qui est due à la hauteur de 2m,5o. Le frottement
  du tapis est supposé conformément aux expérien-
  ces, du cinquième pendant le choc et du quart pen-
  dant le mouvement qui a lieu après. On voit, par le
 tracé géométrique de la marche de la bille, qu'elle peut
 caramboler sur deux billes placées sur une ligne droite
 partant de son point de départ. Il suffit qu'elle touche
 la deuxième bille en un point assez loin du point
 d'arrière, c'est-à-dire qu'elle la prenne fine, comme
 disent les joueurs. On pourrait encore caramboler en
 la prenant très-pleine si la vitesse était assez forte
 pour se conserver jusqu'à l'autre bille, et si le tapis
 était très-juste.
    On pourrait varier à l'infini les applications des
 constructions générales. Nous n'avons présenté que
 les principales pour ne pas rendre l'ouvrage trop vo-
 lumineux. Les joueurs pourront facilement étendre
 ces applications, en changeant, s'il y a lieu, les con-
stantes qui dépendent de la nature du billard. Ils ver-
ront dans le texte de cet ouvrage des moyens indirects
de déterminer ces constantes.
   Nous répéterons ici ce que nous avons déjà ditpour
les chocs entre les billes c'est que les dimensions des
courbes croissent ou décroissent, non dans le rapport
des vitesses, mais dans le rapport de leurs carrés. Si
donc on change l'échelle des vitesses pour les considé-
rer comme plus ou moins grandes, on devra changer
l'étendue des courbcs. Mais les directions et les gran-
deurs des vitesses finales resteront toujours les mêmes.
   On doit remarquer aussi que les constructions qui
donnent les directions finales subsistent toujours,
quelles que soient les lois que suivent les deux frot-
temens de glissemens et de roulement.
              CHAPITRE PREMIER.

Mouvement d'une bille sur un plan horizontal,
                                                en ayant égard
                      aux frottements.

  Nous commencerons par étudier le mouvement
d'une bille sur un plan où elle frotte en le considé-
rant comme résultant de certaines vitesses initiales
de translation et de rotation. Dans les chapitres sui-
vans nous examinerons comment le choc de la queue
et le choc des billes, entre elles et avec la bande, in-
fluent sur les vitesses initiales et par suite sur le mou-
vement de la bille ce sera seulement dans cette se-
conde partie que l'on commencera à voir ressortir,
comme conséquence de la théorie, les règles sur la
manière de donner le coup de queue pour produire
les effets qu'on a en vue.
   Reprenons d'abord ici la théorie assez connue du
mouvement d'un corps solide, mais en l'appliquant de
suite à la sphère afin d'arriver beaucoup plus directe-
ment aux équations de son mouvement.
   La bille étant supposée homogène et parfaitement
sphérique, il n'y a pas lieu à considérer son poids dont
l'effet est détruit; on devra seulement avoir égard
aux forces qui naissent des frottemens. Pour une par-
faite exactitude, il faut tenir compte de deux espèces
de frottemens     un premier, qui est le frottement due
glissement, c'est celui qui se manifeste quand la bille
glisse sur le tapis; un second, qu'on peut appeler frot-
!'('ment de roulement. Ce dernier a lieu indépendam-
ment du glissement des surfaces, il provient d'un
fléchissement que le poids de la bille produit sur le
tapis, et il donne naissance à une force agissant dans
une direction qui s'incline sur la pression verticale,
fit produit une composante horizontale dont la direc-
tion est opposée à celle de la vitesse du centre de la
bille. Ainsi, tandis que le frottement de glissement doit
agir en sens opposé de la vitesse de glissement du
point d'appui de la bille sur le tapis, la force horizon-
tale produite par le frottement de roulement agit en
sens opposé de la vitesse du centre de la bille. Ce der-
nier frottement n'est qu'une très-petite fraction du
premier; on pourrait donc le négliger sans erreur
pour les applications au jeu de billard. Mais nous ne
 le ferons pas d'abord, et nous réunirons ces deux
 forces en une.
    Désignons par U et V les vitesses du centre de
 gravité de la bille dans le sens de deux axes coordon-
 nés pris dans le plan horizontal sur lequel elle se
 meut, vitesses dont la résultante seraW. Représentons
 par 1\1 la masse de la bille, et par X et Y, les com-
  posantes dans le sens des axes de la force produite par
  les frottemens sur le tapis.
     Nous aurons les équations
   Désignons par drrc la masse d'un quelconque des
élémens de la bille par x,j,z,  ses coordonnées rap-
portées à des plans passant par son centre de gravité
et restant fixes en direction.
   Nous supposerons que l'axe des z est en dessus du
tapis, et que l'axe des est pris à gauche de l'axe des
x pour un observateur, sur l'axe des z positifs.
  En appelant R le rayon de la bille les coordonnées
du point où agit le frottement seront x=o, y=o,
z      R.
  Les équations du mouvement de rotation, for-
mées en égalant les momens autour du centre, se-
ront

    Pour les réduire aux trois variables qui déterminent
Ife plus simplement le mouvement d'une sphère

nous représenterons par n la vitesse angulaire de ro-
tation, et par a, (3 y les angles que fait avec les axes
l'axe instantané de rotation en le prenant d'un côté
tel que la rotation se fasse de gauche à droite autour
de cet axe; de sorte que dans le cas où cet axe de ro-
tation tomberait par exemple sur l'axe des x positifs
les points supérieurs de la bille tourneraient de z
vers r. Les angles a., j3, y étant pris comme nous ve-
nons de le dire, nous poserons
                        i2 cos. a = p
                      Si cos. p = q
                      n cos. "1 = r.
   On peut remarquer que les qualités p, q, r sont
aussi les projections sur les plans coordonnés des
vitesses de rotation pour les points situés dans les
grands cercles parallèles à ces plans coordonnés.
   Les cinq élemens U, V, p, q r détermineront
complétement le mouvement de la bille.
   Il est facile d'exprimer au moyen de p, q, r, la
somme des momens des quantités de mouvement sur
les plans coordonnés.
   Si l'on appelle K le moment d'inerCie de la bille par
rapport à l'un de ses diamètres  a K sera l'expression
de la somme des momens des quantités de mouvement
par rapport à l'axe de rotation. Cette somme de mo-
mens projetée sur les plans coordonnés donnera pR
Kq, Kr. Ainsi on a

Les équations (B) du mouvement de rotation devien-
dront donc
En combinant ces équations avec celles du mouve-
ment du centre de gravité, qui sont

On en tirera les cinq inconnues U, V, p, q, r, quand
on connaîtra les forces X et Y.
  Quelles que soient les forces produites par les frot-
temens, il suffit qu'elles agissent toujours horizonta-
lement et au point le plus bas de la bille pour qu'on
ait les équations ci-dessus. Par ces équations (A)
on voit que le centre de la bille décrira une ligne
courbe tant que les forces XY ne seront pas dirigées
dans le sens même de la vitesse du centre dontU et V
sont les composantes. Cela arrivera toujours si le
glissement au point d'appui sur le tapis n'a pas lieu
dans la direction même de la vitesse du centre, c'est-
à-dire si l'axe de rotation n'est pas perpendiculaire à
cette vitesse.
   En éliminant X et Y dans les équations (C) et (A),
on aura

                                          -jrpr-
  Si l'on remarque que dans une sphère             1=   R

les équations ci-dessus deviendront
En intégrant ces équations et désignant par U,, V,
p,,q,} r, les valeurs initiales des variables, on aura

   Ces équations montrent i° que r sera constant.
2° que p etq ne changeront qu'avec U et V; ainsi la bille
ne peut changer d'axe de rotation qu'autant qu'elle ne
marchera pas uniformément, et réciproquement.
   Les relations ci-dessus se présentent sous une forme
plus symétrique et plus commode si l'on change les
variables.
   Désignons par u et v les composantes de la vi-
tesse w de rotation du centre de percussion supérieur
de la bille c'est-à-dire d'un point situé sur la verti-
cale passant par le centre et à une hauteur égale
au du rayon en dessus de ce centre; on aura, d'a-
près la définition des quantités p q r,

Ainsi, en marquant toujours les valeurs initiales par
des accens en bas des lettres, on aura
Ces dernières équations apprennent que la résultante
de la vitesse du centre et de celle du centre de percussion
supérieur est toujours constante pendant le mouvement.
Ce théorème subsiste quelle que soit la nature de la
force qui a lieu au point d'appui. Ainsi, il a lieu en
considérant les deux frottemens comme si l'on n'en
considérait qu'un.
  Remarquons maintenant qu'à l'instant où la bille
                                                    glis-
ne glisse plus au point d'appui le frottement, de
sement cessera d'exister; il ne restera que l'autre qui
ne sera plus capable de changer la direction du
mouvement de la bille; alors celle-ci roulera en ligne
droite sans se détourner. Or, l'instant où cela arrivera
sera celui où la vitesse de rotation au point
                                                 d'appui
sera égale et opposée à celle du centre, ou, ce qui re-
vient au même, celui où la vitesse de rotation du
point situé sur la verticale à l'opposé du point d'appui
au-dessus du centre sera égale et dans le même sens
que celle du centre.
   Or, les composantes de la vitesse de ce dernier point
sont

   Ainsi la bille roulera sans glisser et ira en ligne
droite lorsqu'on aura

En substituant dans les équations précédentes (E),
on aura
Ces valeurs de U et de Vsont ilonc les vitesses qu'aura
 le centre lorsque la bille aura fini de se mouvoir en
 ligne courbe et qu'elle suivra une ligne droite en rou-
lant. Ces vitesses donnent ce que nous appellerons ici
la direction finale du mouvement de la bille. Ainsi
cette direction finale est indépendante de la nature des
frottemens; elle est toujours la direction de la résul-
tante de la vitesse W dit centre de la bille et de la vitesse
w de rotation du centre de percussion supérieur: et
cela, quelle que soit la nature des deux frottemens.
    Nous allons maintenant nous occuper du mouve-
ment de la bille avant qu'elle soit arrivée à cet état
final et pendant qu'elle frotte sur le tapis, afin
d'avoir la courbe qu'elle décrit et la manière dont va-
rient les vitesses U et V de son centre pendant cette
première partie de son mouvement.
    Pour cela nous négligerons le frottement de rou-
lement qui est très-petit devant celui de glissement.
    Introduisons donc, dans les équations (A), la direc-
tion de la force due au seul frottement de glissement.
    On sait que le frottement de glissement agit dans
une direction opposée à la vitesse dn point qui vient
toucher le tapis; ainsi, en appelant comme à l'ordinaire
f  le rapport constant ou variable du frottement à la
pression   on aura
                   X =     fg M ces. a
                   Y =     fg M cos. b,
a et b étant les angles que fait avec les axes la vitesse
du point matériel de la bille qui touche le tapis. Cette
vitesse est la résultante de la vitesse de translation du
centre et de la vitesse de rotation du point d'appui.
  La vitesse de rotation au point d'appui a évidem-
ment pour composantes

Ainsi la vitesse absolue de ce point aura pour com-
posantes, suivant les axes,

  Désignons ici, pour abréger, par Wd le dénomina-
teur de ces expressions, c'est-à-dire la vitesse absolue
du point qui frotte; cette quantité Wa sera toujours
prise positivement, les signes de ces cosinus étant
fournis par les numérateurs. On aura ainsi

Nous remettrons dans ces équations les valeurs de u
et v en U et Y, tirées des équateurs (E) qui sont
En appelant U et V les valeurs des vitesses finales
trouvées plus haut; c'est-à-dire
                                 en posant

  Cette équation ne dépend plus de la loi suivant la-
quelle le frottement peut varier, puisque f s'est éli-
miné avec Wa. En l'intégrant à partir de l'origine du
mouvement, et passant des logarithmes aux nombres,
on trouve

qui expriment les cosinus des angles
                                         que fait avec les
axes fixes la vitesse au point d'appui, sont des quantités
constantes pendant tout le mouvement. Ces cosinus
restent ainsi pendant toute la durée du mouvement
égaux à leurs valeurs initiales

   Nous arrivons donc à cette conséquence remarqua-
ble, c'est que duns le mouvement d'une bille sphérique
et homogène sur un plan horizontal qui exerce un frot-
tement de glissement sur celle-ci, la direction du frot-
tement ne varie pas pendant le mouvement.
   Ce théorème va nous permettre de traiter avec fa-
cilité tout ce qui concerne le mouvement d'une bille
en ayant égard au frottement sur le tapis.
   Le mouvement sera varié et non uniforme toutes
les fois qu'on n'aura pas à l'origine du mouvement

c'est-à-dire toutes les fois que la vitesse au point où il
y a frottement ne sera pas nulle à l'origine.
   Si, à un instant quelconque, cette vitesse devient
nulle, alors le frottement cesse etlavaleurde, féprouve
une discontinuité qui en produit une aussi dans le
mouvement. A cet instant on doit posery=o, et l'on
a toujours alors

Ainsi les vitessesU et V ne changentplus et il en est de
même des quantités p, q, r, qui dépendent unique-
ment de ces vitesses.
 Quand les vitesses initiales U, et V, ne coïncident
pas avec U, et V" les équations différentielles donnant
pour dU et dV les mêmes signes que pour U            U
et Vi V, on en conclut que les vitesses U et V iront
toujours en s'approchant de U, et V,, jusqu'à ce que
                         =
l'on ait enfin U = U" V V,, ou, ce qui revient au
même, jusqu'à ce   qu'on ait,

   Alors la vitesse au point d'appui devenant nulle,
le frottement disparaît; on a/=   o, et le mouvement
devient uniforme. La bille alors roule sur le tapis de
manière que son centre se meut en ligne droite avec
une vitesse constante. C'estparsuite de cette remarque
que nous appelons vitesse finale cette vitesse dont les
composantes suivant les axes sont les constantes U et
V, déterminées au moyen des vitesses initiales par les
relations déjà posées,

   Rappelons encore ici que la grandeur de la vitesse
finale ne dépend nullement ni de l'intensité ni de la
loi suivant laquelle varie le frottement; l'état final
ne dépend que des initiales ut, vz, U., V.
   On peut encore présenter ces valeurs sous une au-
tre forme, en y introduisant les vitesses au point
d'appui. Si l'on appelle Ua, V,1 les composantes de la
vitesse du point d'appui Wa, ce qui revient à poser
   Ces valeurs donnent cet énoncé, que la vitesse du
centre de la bille dans son état final de roulement s'ob.
tiendra erz composant la vitesse initiale de ce même cen-
tre avec les de la vitesse initiale dit point supérieur.
Cette dernière s'obtient en composant la. vitesse de
rotation pour ce point d'appui avec la vitesse du
 centre.
    Il résulte de plus, en vertu de la forme linéaire de
 l'équation (G) en U et V, que si l'on porte sur le plan
 du tapis, à partir d'une origine fixe, une droite qui re-
 présente en grandeur et en direction la vitesse du
 centre de la bille pendant son mouvement, l'extrémité
 de cette longueur décrira une ligne droite pour aller se
 porter vers la position finale; et cette droite, décrite
 ainsi par l'extrémité de cette vitesse variable, sera dans
 la direction de la vitesseWa du pointd'appui de la bille.
 Ainsi en se portant à la figure i, où AB représente la
 vitesse initiale du centre de la bille que nous désigne-
 rons par W,, où AG indique la vitesse initiale de rota-
 tion au point d'appui que nous désignerons par Wr, et
BF la vitesse effective à ce point que nous avons dé-
 signé par Wa; !a vitesse variable du centre pendant
le mouvement sera représentée par la longueur va-
riable AB', dont l'extrémité B' se mouvera sur la droite
BF     le point E, où va s'arrêter le point B', sera placé
de manière queBE = ^BF.
    On peut remarquer que la direction et la grandeur
de la vitesse finale de translation BE peut s'obtenir
en prenant sur AG une longueur AHn=:w>:=:|AG, et
joignant le point H avec le point B par une ligne HB
qui sera ainsi parallèle à la vitesse finale AE, mais
qui en sera les Alors AH représente en grandeur et
                                          c'est celle du
en direction une vitesse opposée à w
centre de percussion inférieur.
   On peut encore avoir cette direction finale en joi-
gnant AD; le point D étant obtenu en portant sur BD
parallèle à AF une distance BD t= w e=s j AF, c'est-à-
dire en composant la vitesse BD = w du centre de
percussion supérieur avec la vitesse AB            W du

centre de la bille.
   De même qu'il y a un état final pour la vitesse de
translation de la bille, il y en a un aussi pour son
mouvement de rotation. Les valeurs finales de p, q, r
s'obtiendront par les relations (D) en y faisant U=U,,
V=V,; on obtient ainsi

   Les premiers membres étant ici les valeurs de la
vitesse au point d'appui, ces équations ne font qu'ex-
primer, comme cela doit être, que dans l'état final
de l'axe de rotation cette vitesse est nulle, et que la
bille roule et ne frotte plus; ou, ce qui revient au
même, que la vitesse de rotation au point d'appui
devient alors égale et opposée à celle du centre.
   On déduit des valeurs ci-dessus de Rp, et Rq,
   Cette relation apprend que dans la position finale
l'axe de rotation est dans un plan vertical perpendicu-
laire ci la direction de la vitesse finale du centre de la bille.
   Si dans les équations (D) on introduit les vitesses
de rotation du point d'appui qu'on représentera par
Ur et Vr, en sorte qu'on ait

distinguant ici par Ur' Vr' les initiales de ces vitesses
U,. et Y,
  Ces équations montrent que si l'on porte, à partir
de l'origine fixe des coordonnées, une droite AG
{fig. i ), qui représente à un instant quelconque, en
grandeur et en direction, la vitesse de rotation pour
le point d'appui de la bille, son extrémité G décrira
une ligne droite GG" parallèle à la droite BE décrite
par l'extrémité B de la vitesse de translation du centre
de la bille.
   Si, au lieu de diriger la longueur qui représente la
vitesse de rotation, dans le sens de cette vitesse, on la
dirige dans le sens directement opposé à AG, c'est-à-
dire dans le sens de la vitesse de rotation du point su-
périeur sur le diamètre vertical, alors l'extrémité F de
cette vitesse ainsi dirigée se déplacera pendant le
mouvement sur la mêmedroite BF que l'extrémité B de
la vitesse de translation. En effet, en appliquant alors
les lettres Ur et Vr aux projections de cette dernière
longueur, on aura pour l'état final
                   Ur = U, et   y = V,.
Ainsi, puisque les extrémités en question viennent se
joindre dans l'état final qu'elles doivent décrired'ail-
leurs des lignes parallèles, elles se mouveront sur la
même droite BF, qui joint leurs positions initiales B et
F et qui représente la vitesse initiale Wn du point
d'appui.
    Ainsi, on peut regarder l'effet du frottemet comme
tendant à rapprocher l'une de l'autre, et sur la ligne
droite BF, les extrémités B' et F' des lignes qui représen-
tent les vitesses de translation du centre et de rotation
 du point supérieur de la bille. Ceci est indépendant
 de la nature du frottement. On verra tout à l'heure
 que, s'il est constant, alors les extrémités B'F' s'a-
vancent l'une vers l'autre d'un mouvement uniforme.
    Si l'on veut examiner la marche de l'axe de rotation
 de la bille il est clair que sa projection sur le plan du
 tapissera perpendiculaireàla droite AH', ou à la droite
 AG' qui représente la vitesse de rotation au point
 d'appui. Si l'on prend un point sur cet axe à une dis-
 tance du centre de la bille égale à la vitesse de rotation
 àl'équateur,c'est-à-direàflr,lescoordonnées seront les
 quantités Rp, Rq, R/' comme Rr, reste constant pen-
 dant le mouvement, il s'ensuit que ce point se mou-
 vera sur une horizontaleperpendiculaire àBF. Ainsi,
 l'axe restera dans un plan incliné ayant sur le tapis
  une trace perpendiculaire àBF. Le déplacement de cet
  axe est donc tellement lié à celui de la vitesse AG' au
  point d'appui ou à son opposée AF', que la marche de
cette ligne suffit pour donner l'idée la plus complète
du mouvement de l'axe.
   Ayant donné les valeurs finales des élémens du
mouvement de la bille, et ayant montré qu'elles ne
dépendent en aucune manière de la loi que suit le
frottement, et même si l'on considère le frottement
de roulement, nous allons chercher maintenant les
expressions variables de ces élémens en fonction du
temps, en admettant alors, comme cela devient néces-
saire, que le frottement de roulement est insensible
et que le frottement de glissement est indépendant de
la vitesse.
   Dans les calculs suivans nous regarderons ainsi f
comme une constante; ou plutôt, pour s'exprimer plus
exactement, comme une fonction de la vitesse de
glissement, qui est nulle quand cette vitesse est nulle,
et qui saute brusquement à une valeur finie et con-
stante dès que cette vitesse devient sensible.
   Reprenons les équations (F), et rcmarquons que les
rapports    V   a   W a     c'est-à-dire les cosinus des
angles que fait avec les axes la vitesse au point d'appui
où s'exerce le frottement, ont des valeurs constantes.
Les équations (E), deviendront donc

En intégrant et appelant x etr les coordonnées de la
position du centre de la bille au bout du temps t,
on aura
                   U = U, fg cos. at.
                   V = V,– fg cos. bt.
   Les deux premières équations cn U et V montrent
que l'extrémité B' de la droite, qui représente en gran-
deur et en direction la vitesse W du centre de la bille,
avance d'un mouvement uniforme vcrs le point E, et
à cause des relations linéaires entre U,V, Ur et Vr,
l'extrémité F' de la droite qui représente la vitesse de
rotation du point supérieur, avance également vers
E d'un mouvement uniforme. La vitesse constante
avec laquelle l'extrémité B' de la vitesse de translation
W se porte de B vers E est égale ïxfg, et celle avec la-
quelle l'extrémité F' de la vitesse de rotation Wr au
point supérieur se porte de F vers E est \fg. De plus, la
vitesse iv ducentredepercussionsupérieur s'obtiendra
en joignant B'D, le point D étant toujours le même.
   Les valeurs ci-dessus de x et y montrent que la
courbe décrite est une parabole; c'est ce que l'on voit
du reste directement, par cela seul que le frottement
agit dans une direction constante, et qu'on vient
d'admettre qu'il était aussi constant en intensité.
    On pourrait avoir facilement l'équation de cette
parabole, mais il est préférable de chercher seulement
les points et les tangentes extrêmes de la portion de
 courbe décrite avant quelabillesoitàson état final. Au
 point de départ la tangente à la courbe est la vitesse
 même AB, dont les composantes sont U, et Y,.
    Si l'on veut avoir ce qui se rapporte à l'extrémité de
 la courbe lorsque la bille est arrivée à l'état final, il
 faudra faire U ~U,, VtsV,, et l'on aura
Wadésignanttoujours ici la vitesseavec laquellelepoint
d'appui frotte sur le tapis à l'origine du mouvement.
  Si l'on appelle xa ja les coordonnées du dernier
point de la parabole pour la position où la bille prend
sa vitesse finale rectiligne, on aura, en mettant la va-
leur ci-dessus de t dans les expressions qu'on vient de
donner des coordonnées du centre de la bille il. un
instant quelconque,

En vertu des équations (H), ces valetms peuvent se
mettre sous la forme

Ua et Va étant ici les composantes de la vitesse de frot-
tement Wa à l'origine.
  On peut encore introduire les vitesses et v, du
centre d'oscillation supérieur dans les coordonnées x,
etj;, et l'on aura
   Il est facile de voir, par les valeurs (1) de x et dej\,
que si l'on prend sur BF un point M au milieu de BE,
le rayon AM passera par le point dont x, etj, sont
les coordonnées. Pour placer ce point sur ce rayon,
il suffira de réduire la longueur AM dans le rapport
de Wa à/g. On effectuera cette réduction en prenant
AJ \=fget parallèle à FB, et en menant IL parallèle à
JM par le point 1 qui répond à AI == DE        Wa. Le
point L ainsi déterminé sur AM sera l'extrémité de la
courbe décrite par la bille. Par ce point L menant une
droite LV parallèle à AE, on aura la marche finale de
la bille.
   On peutconstruire la position de la marche finaleLV
de la bille, la seule chose dont on ait besoin ordinaire-
ment pour assurer le jeu, en cherchant seulement le
point où cette droite coupe la direction AG de la vi-
tesse de rotation au point d'appui. C'est ce que l'on
fera de la manière suivante.
   La droite parcouruepar la bille dans sa marche finale
passant parle point dont les coordonnées sont x, et
y-j et se dirigeant suivant une ligne parallèle à la
                                                     vitesse
finale dont les composantes sont Ua et V., son équation
sera

Si l'on prend la direction de la vitesse de rotation du
point d'appui pour axe des y, et qu'on fasse dans cette
équation x = o, la valeur de y sera la distance cher-
chée en la désignant par p, on aura

  Mais on a en même temps par les formules F et J qui
donnent U, et V, et x, et     j\,
                            en y faisant il,:= o et
v t=w à cause de la direction des axes, et appelant
toujours ainsi w, la vitesse initiale de rotation du
centre de percussion supérieur

  Le signe de cette valeur indique qu'elle se portera
du côté opposé à w. On la construira en menant par
le point J (fig. 2), pris comme dans la figure 1, une
ligne JH et par le point P, milieu de AI, une pa-
rallèle PR à JH; le point R où elle coupe la droite AH

  Si l'on voulait la distance entre A et la droite RLV,
en la comptant sur la direction de la vitesse BF, on se
servirait alors des valeurs (J), en posant Ua o et
Va == Wa; on aurait ainsi

Cette distance, qui doit être portée sur AI, est égale à la
hauteur due à la vitesse WQ multipliée par           On la

construirait encore facilement.
  Si enfin on voulait avoir la distance entre A et le
point où la ligne finale LV décrite par la bille vient
couper la direction de AB, on trouverait
  On construirait cette valeur en menant par P, milieu
de AI, une parallèle PQ à JB; le point J étant tou-
jours tel qu'on ait AI -==fg. La droite finale LV devrait
passer par le point Q ainsi obtenu.
  Si l'on veut déterminer la perpendiculaire abaissée
du point A sur la droite finale; en l'appelant Tr, on
aura, en égalant les momens de la vitesse finale à la
différence des momens des composantes,

et en substituant pour xj\ leurs valeurs en U, V et
U, V,, on aura

En introduisant le sinus de l'angle (<y    <{/) que font
les directions initiale et finale,
on aura

  On peut construire cette valeur facilement (fig. 2)
                                                 elle
en abaissant de A la perpendiculaire AT une HB;
sera W, sin. (<]/ 9). Par le point J, pris comme sur
la figure 1, on tracera JT, et ensuite par le point P,
milieu de AI, on mènera PS parallèle à JT; cette droite
coupera la ligne AT au point S, qui donnera AS = n.
   Si l'on suppose que la vitesse de rotation w du cen-
trc de percussion est dirigée dans le sens de la vi-
tesse W de translation du centre ou en sens op-
posé, la bille continue de marcher en ligne droite,
mais son mouvement est varié jusqu'à ce qu'elle
soit arrivée à l'état final; alors la ligne AB tombe sur
AF ou en sens opposé, et la vitesse finale Wa est donnée
par

   En même temps on a pour la distancer, parcourue
par la bille jusqu'à ce qu'elle soit arrivée à son état
final,

  Ici le signe doit être seulement celui de W, +    w,
puisque le facteur Wa dans les formules n'a pas de
signe par lui-même, ceux-ci se portant entièrement
sur les composantes U, V, u et v, dont les résultantes
sont W et w.
  Si la bille est partie sans rotation, on a alors

le signe étant celui de W,. Si elle est partie sans vi-
tesse de translation, alors on a

le signe étant celui de wt.
   Si l'on veut la relation générale entre le chemin dé-
crity à un instant quelconque, et la vitesse du cen-
tre W à cet instant, on aura
et

le signe inférieur étant pris seulement dans les cas où
J'on a W,       wt < o, et où la vitesse absolue Woau
point d'appui étant dirigée en sens opposé à celle du
centre, le frottementtendra à accélérer le mouvement
au lieu de le retarder.
  On tire des équations précédentes

le signe étant pris pour rendre cette quantité positive.
     Si l'on désigne par Y la distance
                                         –f-,
                                                on aura

     On voit par ces valeurs que la vitesse en fonction de
la distancey est représentée par l'ordonnée d'une pa-
rabole dont la distance focale est–             et dont le som-

metest à une distance Y ou         du point de départ de la
                                       \wt > o, comme
                                       W,
                                  bille,
                                   soi
                                    tdevant
                                      joueur
                                       quand

le représente la courbe CGK dans la figure 6, soit der-
rière quand W, w, <; o, comme le représente la
courbe CGK dans la figure 7.
   Quant à w, il sera donné par la partie d'ordonnée
comprise entre l'une ou l'autre des paraboles, et une
parallèle à l'axe MK tracée à une hauteur égale
à W, + iV,;W, étant la valeur de w à l'origine.
   Quand nous aurons parlé de l'effetdu coup de queue,
nous reviendronsavec plus de détails sur la construc-
tion des vitesses W et w, au moyen de ces figures 6 et 7.
   Pour réduire en nombre quelques-unes des formu-
les trouvées dans les articles précédens, j'ai fait des
expériences qui ont eu pour objet de déterminer la
vitesse que peut prendre la bille sous le coup de
queue quand on la frappe dans la direction du centre.
   Avant fait frapper horizontalement une bille de gros-
seur ordinaire qui était suspendue par un fil d'environ
2mde longueur, j'ai observé que, pour un coup de queue,
 comme le donne un joueur ordinaire, mais non pas
pour le plus fort coup que pourraient donner certains
joueurs, la bille remontait verticalement d'environ
 rm, 20; et que pour un coup de queue très-fort, la hau-
 teur pouvait aller à 3,5o. Ainsi, en appelant Wo la vi-
 tesse initiale du centre de la bille, ou a pour un coup
 ordinaire

   Pour déterminer le coefficient/, j'ai disposé un appa-
reil au moyen duquel la bille se trouvait tirée hori-
zontalement sur le tapis par un fil tendu avec un
poids. En faisant des marques sur le tapis j'ai pu arri-
ver à reconnaître que le mouvement de la bille était
sensiblement uniforme quand elle était mue avec une
force égale aux o,25 de son poids sur un drap fin,
 et aux o,3o de son poids sur un drap plus gros ou plus
 usé.
   La première valeur est celle qu'il faut adopter pour
 un billard en bon état. Quoique les choses n'aient
 pas été disposées pour observer des vitesses au
 delà de i", oo par seconde, tandis qu'après le
                                                     coup
de queue une bille peut prendre une vitesse beaucoup
plus forte; cependant comme d'autres expériences,
entre autres celles de M. Morin, ont montré que pour
tous les corps, les frottemens jusqu'à des vitesses de
4 mètres, sont indépendans de la vitesse, nous
                                                    avons
pu, sans crainte d'erreur, admettre qu'il en est de même
ici pour le frottement de la bille contre le tapis, et
qu'il reste toujours indépendant de la vitesse. Pre-
nant donc pour les applications
                       f  = 0,25,
on a pour un coup de queue ordinaire

  Ainsi, lorsque la bille part sans rotation, comme
cela arrive quand la queue l'a frappée dans une di-
rection qui passe par son centre, la distance^ du
point de départ au point où la bille commence à
rouler sans glisser et arrive à l'état que nous avons
appelé final, étant donnée par
devient, pour une vitesse ordinaire,
                     y, = 2,40,
et pour la plus forte vitesse
                       y, 5,oo.
   On verra dans le chapitre suivant comment ces dis-
tances doivent être modifiées lorsque la queue ne
touche pas la bille de manière que la ligne du choc
passe par son centre.
                   CHAPITRE II.

           De l'effet du coup de queue horizontal.

  Nous allons examiner maintenant les effets du choc
de la queue sur la bille, en le supposant d'abord di-
rigé parallèlement au tapis. Nous consacrerons un
autre chapitre au coup de queue incliné; la théorie
qui en donne les effets étant plus compliquée et
moins nécessaire aux applications au jeu ordinaire,
nous avons pensé qu'il valait mieux la présenter
séparément.
   On emploie deux espèces de queues; les unes, dites
à procédé, sont terminées à leur pointe par une gar-
niture de cuir formant une espèce de demi-sphère
saillante, les autres sont coupées à la pointe suivant
un plan perpendiculaire à leur longueur,. Quand on
se sert des premières, on a soin de frotter la garni-
ture avec une substance qui augmente le frottement
surla bille. On fait en sorte par-là qu'il ne se produise
pas de glissement entre la queue et la bille pendant le
choc, lors même que la direction de la vitesse des points
de la queue qui viennent choquer la bille fait un
angle assez sensible avec la normale à la bille ce glis-
sement ne peut en effet avoir lieu tant que cet angles
est inférieur à celui du frottement. Pour les queues
 non garnies et coupées d'équerre à leur axe, comme
 on ne peut frapper que dans une direction normale
 au point de choc, dès lors, quelque faible que soit le
 frottement, il est toujours suffisant pour qu'il n'y ait
pas de glissement entre la queue et la bille au moment
du choc.
   Par cela seul qu'il n'y a pas de glissement de la
queue sur la bille dans le choc, les points de cette
dernière, qui sont frappés par la queue, y adhè-
rent et ne peuvent prendre, tant que le contact a lieu,
que des vitesses identiques avec celles des points
choquans de la queue. Celle-ci étant dirigée par
le joueur de manière que ses points conservent pen-
dant le choc des vitesses dans la direction de son axe
de figure, il en est de même des points choqués de la
bille; ceux-ci doivent donc être considérés comme
recevant de la queue pendant le choc une quantité de
mouvement dont la direction est celle de l'axe de la
queue.
   C'est au reste ce que l'expérience confirme pleine-
ment, car si dans le choc la direction de la quantité
de mouvement imprimée à la bille n'était pas celle de
l'axe de la queue, et qu'il y eût glissement au contact,
il serait impossible défaire un coup assuré, vu la dif-
férence d'intensité du frottement en employant une
queue ou une autre, et avec la même queue, suivant
qu'on aurait plus ou moins enduit le cuir de craie ou
de toute autre substance pouvant adhérer à la bille.
Quand la queue glisse au contact et que le frottement
vient ainsi modifier la direction de la quantité de
mouvement, on dit qu'on faitfausse queue et cette
espèce de coup n'est pas au nombre de ceux dont on
puisse tirer parti au billard.
   Si par l'effet de l'élasticité la seconde quantité de
mouvement, ajoutée à celles que produit sur la bille
la première partie du choc pendant la compression
n'avait pas la même direction que celle de cette pre-
mière quantité de mouvement, il serait également im-
possible de jouer d'une manière assurée, puisqu'alors
la direction du mouvement après le choc dépendrait
de l'élasticité relative de la bille et de la queue, et ne
serait pas celle du mouvement de la queue, ainsi qu'on
le reconnaît par expérience. Bien qu'il soit impossible
dans l'état de la science d'établir cette proposition di-
rectement par la théorie, on peut cependant la re-
garder comme suffisamment prouvée par l'expérience,
et l'admettre comme base des calculs.
   En partant donc de ce point que la bille reçoit par
le choc de la queue une quantité de mouvement dans
la direction du mouvement de la queue et appliquée
au point où se fait le contact, nous allons déterminer
la vitesse qu'elle prendra, en fonction de la quantité
de mouvement qu'elle reçoit au point où se fait le
choc nous verrons plus loin comment cette quan-
tité de mouvement peut, dans les cas ordinaires, se
déduire de la vitesse que l'on a imprimée à la queue.
   Choisissons maintenant, pour la direction des y
partant du centre de la bille, comme origine une di-
rection parallèle au plan vertical passant par l'axe de
la queue, c'est-à-dire par sa vitesse de translation; et
pour le sens de cesy positifs celui de la projection de
 cette vitesse sur le plan du tapis nous prendrons,
 comme nous l'avons déjà fait, les x positifs à droite
 de cette direction, et les z positifs dessus du tapis.
                                        en
 Dans ce qui suit, ce que nous désignerons
                                                  par poifat
 de choc sera le point de la bille qui est frappé
                                                      par la
 queue nous appellerons ligne du choc celle qui est
 menée par le point de choc dans la direction de la
 queue ou de la vitesse des points qui choquent la
 bille.
    Le choc étant supposé horizontal, il n'y
 à considérer l'effet du frottement                aura pas
                                         sur le tapis pen-
 dant le choc la bille reste donc comme libre. Elle
 recevra dans la direction du coup de queue une
 quantité de mouvement dont la mesure
 duit de sa masse par la vitesse de           sera le pro-
                                      son centre.
   Nous poserons les notations suivantes
   M, la masse de la bille;
   R, son rayon
   W, la vitesse que prend son centre à l'instant où
elle a reçu le coup de
                         queue;
   h, l'abscisse du point où fait le choc, c'est-à-dire
                              se
la distance entre le centre de la bille et
tical passant par le point où fait le choc,   un plan ver-
                                  se                et dans
la direction de ce choc, c'est-à-dire de l'axe
                                                       de la
queue;
   l, la hauteur du point où
                                se fait le choc au-dessus
du tapis.
   Pour déterminer le mouvement de rotation
fonction des données ci-dessus,                          en
                                     on posera les équa-
tions qui expriment l'égalité entre      les momens au-
tour du centre des quantités de mouvement dues
choc d'un côté et aux vitesses de rotation de            au
                                                    l'autre.
Ce qui donne, en prenant
                             pour axe des y la direction
du coup de queue,
  Ici, la vitesse de rotation initiale w,du centre de per-
cussion supérieur est dirigée sur l'axe des j, puisqu'on
a Ro t=i o. Si Rp, est positif, c'est-à-dire si    R, elle
doit être portée du côté desy positifs, c'est-à-dire dans
le sens du mouvement, et la vitesse du centre de per-
cussion inférieur, que nous avons désignée par AH
dans les figures précédentes, devra se porter en sens
contraire.
   Dans la supposition où nous sommes d'un coup de
queue horizontal, la bille marchera en ligne droite.
Pour avoir à chaque point de sa course les deux élé-
mens W et w, c'est-à-dire la vitesse de translation et
celle de rotation du centre de percussion, on se re-
portera aux équations E du chapitre précédent, qui
donnent

W et wi étant ici les valeurs initiales des vitesses W
et w. Or, on a
ainsi à un instant quelconque, on a

   Dans la figure 6, AD représente la vitesse de trans-
lation W lorsque la bille, partie de M avec une vitesse

                                         •
égale à MC:= Wt, est arrivée en D. On mènera donc
l'horizontale PE à la hauteur MP =             c'est à-dire
de manière que si MC représente le rayon de la bille,
MP représente la hauteur      du choc au-dessus du ta-
pis. Les distances de la parabole à cette droite repré-
senteront donc w. Quand w sera dirige du côté de W,
c'est-à-dire quand la rotation sera directe le point A
tombe en dessous de PE; quand il tombe en dessus,
la rotation w est rétrograde.
   La vitesse W, de la bille, quand elle est à l'état final,
est donnée par

Ainsi la vitesse W, dans la figure 6, ne s'abaissera ja-
mais au-dessous de cette valeui·, si l'on est dans la pa.
rabule inférieure, ni ne s'élèvera au-dessus de cette va-
leur,si ]' on estdanslaparabolesupérieure.INous allons
indiquer comment on distingue ces deux cas d'après
la hauteur du coup de queue.
   Les ordonnées des parties marquées plci nes surla
figure 6 indiquent les vitesses de la bille; les raouve-
mens variés finissent toujours quand la vitesse sera
devenue égale             et quand la parabole aura
coupe la droite GL menée à cette hauteur. Cette
droite se relèvc à mesure que augmente et qu'on a
frappé plus haut.
  Nous avons dit, dans le chapitre précédent, qu'on
ne serait dans le cas de la parabole supérieure fig. 7)
qu'autant qu'on aurait

Ainsi la vitesse au point d'appui ne sera en sens op-
posé au mouvement de la bille, et le frottement n'ac-
célérera la vitesse, qu'autant que le coup de queue
aura été donné à plus des du rayon au-dessus du cen-
tre, c'est-à-dire au-dessus du centre supérieur de per-
cussion de la bille.
   Quand on frappe juste à la hauteur de ce point,
la bille prend de suite son état final, on a W   =   W,

la droite GH passe par le point C; alors il n'y a
plus de parabole. Dans tous les autres cas où l'on
a Z< R, le frottement ralentit la vitesse de trans-
lation, et l'on est dans le cas de la parabole in-
férieure {fig. 6); alors les vitesses de translation du
centre et de rotation du centre de percussion sont
représentées par les hauteurs DA et AH, et elles sont
données par les formules
dans lesquelles on    aj   = MD, Y = MK,etW t=i
MC vitesse initiale du centre de la bille.
   Pour avoir la distance MQ parcourue par la bille
depuis son départ jusqu'au point où elle est à l'état
final il suffit de prendre la valeury, du chapitre pré-
cédent et d'y mettre pour W, et wt leurs valeurs
                                                    on
aura

   ïl est un point de la course de la bille très-impor-
tant à connaître pour les effets du jeu c'est celui où
le point d'appui ou le centre de percussion n'ont
pas de vitesse de rotation et où l'on a w = o c'est
à cet l'instant que nous disons que la bille est à l'état
de glissement.. Cet état a lieu au point 1 qui répond
                                                      au
point E où la parabole est coupée par la droite hori-
zontale PE menée à la hauteur           A ce point on a

la distance MI parcourue alors par la bille,
                                               que nous
désignerons paryy, est donnée par

On peut remarquer que les points 1 et Q ont cette
                                                  re-
lation de position et que l'on a à très-peu près

  Labillenepasseparcctétatdeglissemen^etjr.n'existe
qu'autant qu'on a /<R; car sans cela la droite PE se
trouve au-dessus de la parahole et ne la coupe pas. 11
en est toujours ainsi lorsqu'on est dans le cas de la pa-
rabole supérieure CQ(fig. j), car comme elle s'arrête
             7
à la hauteur        pour se changer en horizontale,
elle ne peut être coupée par la droite PE qui est à
la hauteur
   Quand on a 1 t= R c'est-à-dire quand on frappe la
bille au centre, l'état de glissement a lieu au pointde
départ M ce cas est représenté sur la ligure f>.
   Quand on frappe au-dessous du centre, la rotation
est rétrograde de M en I (/%•. 6), avant le point due
glissement. Dans cet intervalle, rv ou Rp, est pris
négatif dans les formules: au-delà de ce point de glisse-
ment I, w devient positif, ainsi que son égale Hp.
   La hauteur l, à laquelle se donne le coup de queue,
ne peut être ni trop grande ni trop petite quand
on veut donner un coup assuré, puisqu'il faut que
la queue ne glisse pas contre la bille; la limite de
l'écart entre la ligne du choc et le centre dc la bille
est fixée par le plus grand angle que puisse faire la
direction du choc avec la normale à la bille sans qu'il
y ait glissement. Cet angle est ce qu'on appelle l'an-
gle de frottement. L'expérience a appris aux joueurs
qu'on peut sans glisser frapper la bille jusqu'à une
distance du centre de o,7o R; ainsi, en appelante la
 distance du centre de la bille à la ligne du choc; pour
ne pas faire fausse queue, on devra frapper de ma-
 nière qu'on ait
Si le plan vertical du choc passe par le centre de la
bille, c'est-à-dire si R=:o on aura pour le minimurn
de 1
                       l = o,3o R,
et pour le maximum
                       l = i,;o R.
    On peut donc encoreà la rigueur donner le coup àla
hauteur du centre de percussion supérieur qui répond
à ==: 1,40R; mais on frappe rarementà cette hauteur,
de peur qu'en donnant un peu plus haut ou un peu
plus de côté, ce qui augmenterait la distance a au
centre, on ne fasse fausse queue on n'a donc presque
jamais à considérer les vitesses de la bille qui sont re-
présentées par les ordonnées de la parabole placée
comme dans la figure 7.
   Il nous reste mairrtenant à examiner comment la
 vitesse W, communiquée au centre de la bille par le
coup de queue peut résulter de la vitesse supposée
 donnée à la queue, et de la distance a entre la ligne
du choc et le centre de la bille quand le choc ne passe
pas ce centre.
    La circonstance de l'adhérence entre la queue et la
bille pendant le choc ayant, ainsi que l'expérience le
prouve, pour effet définitif' de faire en sorte que la
quantité de mouvement que recoit cette dernière par
le choc et par l'effet de l'élasticité, soittoujours dans
la direction même de la vitesse de la queue, et celle-ci
ne se déviant pas sensiblement pendant le choc, il
nous sera possible d'en conclure la vitesse que doit
prendre le centre de la bille. Nous supposerons d'abord
que le coup de queue est donné en abandonnant la
queue à elle-même sans la serrer avec la main ni sans
la pousser après le choc. Il
                              nous faudra aussi admet-
tre, comme cela a lieu ordinairement,            la bille
 quitte la queue sous le coup et             que
                                   ne soit plus touchée
par   celle-ci après le coup. Nous verrons plus loin
quelles conditions cette circonstance exige,
                                               et ce qui
 arrive quand elle n'a pas lieu.
   Désignons par
   M' la masse de la
                      queue
   W sa vitesse avant le choc
   Wsa vitesse après le choc,
   M la masse de la bille et R
                               son rayon,
   W, la vitesse de son centre après le choc.
   On aura d'abord
                        par les principes connus du
mouvement du centre de gravité et des aires qui sont
indépendans du plus ou moins d'élasticité des
                                                 curps,

  II reste à poser une équation se rapportant
                                                       aux
effets de l'élasticité. Il est impossible dans l'état de la
science, de calculer el priori ce qu'elle produira dans
le choc. J'ai dû chercher par conséquent à étudier
                                                       par
expérience ses effets dans le choc des queues et des
billes. Pour-s^ j'ai suspendu une queue de
                                                       ma-
nière qu'elle pût osciller horizontalement dans le
sens de la longueur, tous ses points décrivant le même
arc de cercle. Il a suffi, pour produire cet effet, d'at-
tacher le devant et le derrière de la queue à deux fils
divergens qui partaient du plafond à
                                        une hauteur
d'cnviron deux mètres au-dessus de 1a
                                      queue. De cette
manière, en écartant la queue de position la plus
                                 sa
basse, elle tendait à y revenir en oscillant sans perdre
son horizontalité. La bille était attachée de même à
deux fils divergens partant du plafond et la prenant
aux extrémités d'un diamètre horizontal. Cette bille
pouvait ainsi osciller et en même temps tourner
autour de son diamètre horizontal. Dans sa position
d'équilibre elle se trouvait placée de manière que le
petit bout de la queue la touchait et que l'axe de celle-ci
passait par son centre. Des cercles divisés avaient été
placés à côté de la queue et de la bille pour donner le
moyen de mesurer les écartemens des fils, et par suite
les hauteurs dont la queue et la bille s'étaient élevées.
   En écartant la queue de sa position d'équilibre,
elle venait frapper la bille au centre avec une force
vive proportionnelle à la hauteur dont on l'avait
élevée. La bille frappée au centre prenait une vi-
tesse de translation qui s'évaluait par la hauteur à
laquelle elle s'élevait. Si la force vive se fût conservée
après le choc, on aurait dû trouver, en vertu de la
conservation du mouvement du centre de gravité,

La queue pesant exactement trois fois le poids de la
bille, on a M' = 3M, et ces formules donnent

Or, on a déduit des écarts de la queue et de la bille
après le choc

  Ainsi la force vive après le choc, au lieu d'être
égale à M'V" ou à 3MV" si elle se fût conservée, n'a
   été que de !ti MV" ou de 2,56 MW". La perte est donc
   de 0,10 de la force vive totale. En variant les vitesses
  de la queue, les pertes de force vive sont restées
                                                       sen-
  siblement dans le même rapport. On n'a pu dépasser
  la vitesse de 2,80 pour la queue, et conséquemment
  de 3,6o pour la bille. Il n'a pas été possible de faire
  des expériences avec des vitesses de choc qui
                                                    appro-
  chassent davantage de celles qui ont lieu dans le jeu
  ordinaire; mais la fraction ci-dessus s'étant conservée
  constante dans ces expériences, nous avons pu l'é-
  tendre aux vitesses qui ont lieu dans le jeu.
     Pour connaître ce que devenait la perte de force
 vive quand le choc passait un peu au-dessous
                                                    ou au-
 dessus du centre de la bille et lui communiquait
                                                       une
 vitesse de rotation autour de l'axe horizontal de
                                                       sus-
 pension, j'ai examiné ce que devenait la vitesse du
 centre;etcommecettederniéreestime conséquence de
 la perte de force vive totale qui a lieu dans le choc,
j'en ai déduit que la perte totale de force vive
                                                     en te-
 nant compte alors de celle qui est employée en rota-
 tion, est toujours à peu près la même.
    Sans doute que ces expériences
                                         ne suffisent pas
pour donner la perte pour les chocs qui ont lieu dans
de forts coups de queue; néanmoins,
                                              comme en
prenant toujours la même fraction 0,1 3 pour la perte
de force vive, on arrive à des conclusions qui sont
d'accord avec ce que l'expérience a appris aux joueurs;
il ne sera pas sans intérêt de voir
                                       en effet ces règles
d'expériences déduites de cette seule supposition d'une
perte en proportion constante avec la force vive to-
tale.
  Posons donc l'équation qui se rapporte à la perte
de force vive. Appelons 6 la fraction de la force vive
M'V'a qui exprime la perte après le choc; nous au-
rons

p., q" r,, étant ici les vitesses trouvées précédem-
ment. En posant
                   a' = il, + (/ R)',
a désignantainsi la distance de la ligne du choc au cen-
tre de la bille,nous aurons en vertu des équations (L)

En joignant à cette équation celle qui se rapporte à
la conservation des quantités de mouvement qui est

   Sil'onveutintroduiredans lavaleur W, de la vitesse
que prend la bille celle qu'ell-e prendrait sous ie même
coup de queue, c'est-à-dire avec la même vitesse de
la queue, mais en donnant le coup au centre; on au-
ra, en appelant W. cette dernière vitesse
Wo ici est la vitesse que nous avons déterminée
                                                   par
expérience,et dont la valeur est de 7m au maximum. Si
l'on part cette valeur de Wo, et qu'on veuille savoir
quelle vitesse prendra la bille si en la frappant
                                                  avec
une queue animée de la même vitesse qui produirait
Wo en frappant au centre, on donne le
                                           coup à une
distance du centrer ~o,6o R; on substitueratoujours
9 =! o,i3   irr– 3, et     o,6o; on aura
                      W, = o,5o Wo.
   La valeur de W, a été construite dans la figure 4,
 où les abscisses OR ou iVI"ifi prises de l'origine, 0
                                                       ou M"
représentent ces distances a le cercle est décri:, d'un
rayon M" M' = R. Les ordonnés MC représentent les
vitesses W, du centre de la bille.
   Pour que les valeurs précédentes de W, et de W,'
subsistent, il faut que le choc de la queue de la bille
se fasse comme nous l'avons supposé, c'est-à-dire que
les deux corps se séparent après le choc, et qu'ainsi
on ait
                        W, >W/,
ce qui donne
    Si cette condition n'a pas lieu, la queue continue de
 toucher la bille après le coup dès lors celle-ci frotte
contre le cuir de la queue, et elle éprouve une grande
diminution dans son mouvement de rotation c'est ce
qui fait que les effets qui dépendent de cette rotation,
comme nous le verrons dans le chapitre suivant, sont
diminués de beaucoup.
   La condition précédente montre que si l'on veut
que ù soit aussi grand que possible, c'est-à-dire égal
à 0,70, limite fixée pour la condition qu'il n'y ait pas
glissement sous le choc, il faudrait pour 0 1= o c'est-
à-dire pour l'élasticité parfaite, qu'on eût –y t=3
Mais en raison de la valeur de S, il faudra prendre
j^r> 7- Si l'on pose 0=so,i3, on trouve que
                                              Mf est un
peu au-dessras de Ainsi, des queues un peu plus
légères que celles dont on fait usage généralement, per-
mettront d'attaquer la bille plus près du bord sans
qu'après le choc il y ait un frottement de la queue et
de la bille qui diminue la rotation. Elles permet-
tront donc d'obtenir un plus grand rapport entre
la vitesse de rotation rétrograde et la vitesse de
translation, puisque ce rapport immédiatement
après le choc, est égal à la fraction { (       Ç–\

     nous voulons avoir la limite de a, qui permet
    Si
de choquer sans frottement après le choc, lorsqu'on a
M
jjr :=2^ comme cela a lieu ordinairement; on trou-
vera d'abord
Ainsi, avec les queues ordinaires qui pèsent trois fois
le poids d'une bille, pour conserver toute la rotation,
on ne doit pas frapper à une distance du centre de
plus des six dixièmes du rayon. Avec des queues
plus légères, il serait possible d'aller jusqu'aux sept
dixièmes et d'obtenir ainsi une plus grande vitesse de
rotation par rapport à celle de translation. Comme
c'est du rapport de ces deux vitesses que dépend la
facilité que l'on a de faire reculer la bille du joueur
après qu'elle en a touché une autre, ainsi que nous
le verrons dans le chapitre suivant, il s'ensuit qu'on
doit, pour bien reculer, employer des queues un peu
plus légères que celles qui sont en usage.
   Maintenant on peut remarquer que, si au lieu d'a-
bandonner la queue à elle-même au moment du choc,
c'est-à-dire de la tenir libre on la serre au contraire
dans la main on joindra une partie de la masse de
l'avant-bras à celle de la queue et on ôtera à ces
masses réunies leur propriété d'élasticité. Cette ma-
nière de choquer pourra donc s'introduire dans les
formules, en supposant M' et e plus grand. En exami-
nant 1 inégalité

on voit qu'elle n'a plus lieu alors pour   aussi grand,
puisque le premier membre diminue quand M' et o
augmentent. Si l'on frappe alors à une même distance
il du centre que dans le cas où la main ne serre pas la
queue cette inégalité pouvaut ne plus avoir lieu, la
queue ne se sépare pas de la bille après le choc, et
le frottement qui en résulte détruit une partie de la
rotation de la bille. Ainsi, pour pouvoir frapper la
bille le plus loin possible du centre sans diminuer
la rotation que le choc tend à produire, il faut tenir
la queue libre dans la main et ne pas la pousser après
le choc.
   Pour reconnaître l'influence des différcntes ma-
nières de frapper la bille sur la distance qu'elle
aura parcourue avant que la rotation rétrograde
soit épuisée, distance dont l'évaluation doit toujours
être faite quand on veut produire des effets singuliers
dans le choc de deux billes ou dans le choc contre la
bande, ainsi que nous le ferons voir dans le chapitre
suivant; nous allons remettre dans la valeur/ don-
née au commencement de ce chapitre la valeur W
trouvée précédemment en fonction de la vitesse W'
de la queue. Nous aurons ainsi
  On se rappellera que, dans le cas du choc hori-
zontal, ainsi que nous le supposons ici, on
                                            a

  Si l'on veut examiner les valeurs maximum de          et
dey,, il faudra déjà prendre h =o, parce que, eu égard
à la petitesse de », h n'aura guère d'influence
                                                  que dans
le dénominateur. Supposons donc      h–o, c'est-à-dire
occupons-nous seulement du cas où le plan vertical
passe par le centre de la bille. Mettons
                                             pour
                                                        sa
valeur dans ce cas, qui est ( i    ^-Y
                                          nous aurons

On peut introduire dans ces formules la vitesse que
prendrait la bille avec le même coup de queue si on
la frappait au centre; on a alors
 d'où

 En mettant cette valeur dans les
                                     expressions précé-
dentes, on aura

   Il ne faut pas perdre de
                                vue que ces form ules ne
 subsistent qu'autant qu'il y a séparation entre la
 et la bille c'est-à-dire que la distance           queue
                                            cc ne dépasse
 pas une certaine limite, laquelle est d'autant moins
grande qu'on serre la queue davantage
                                          avec la main.
   En restant donc dans cette limite où la
                                                 rotation
n'est pas altérée, on peut
                             se demander à quelle dis-
tance du centre il faut frapper la bille
                                            pour rendre
To etjrr les plus grands possibles. On voit en effet
les expressions ci-dessus ont                         que
                                 un  maximum     par rap-
port à l. Si l'on pose pour abréger

et qu'on représente par « |3 « b des constantes
mériques, on aura                               nu-
On peut chercher le maximum de i/^ au lieu de ce-
lui dej», et l'on aura l'équation

En Prenant   -1 3, et = o. i3, on a
                   =      9

        a = o,48   S = 0,97   a = i,33, b = 2,5o
On trouve par des substitutions successives que la
valeur de z est très-près de o,25; on peut la regarder
comme égale à cette fraction. Ainsi, avec un coup de
queue d'une intensité déterminée, pour porter le
point de glissement de la bille le plus loin possible, il
faut frapper à peu près à o,25 du rayon au-dessous du
centre. Comme il n'y aurait plus séparation entre la
queue et la bille en frappant aussi bas, si l'on serrait
la queue dans la main et qu'on détruisît ainsi une
partie de la vitesse de rotation, le point de glissement
ne sera à la distance que donnerait la formule qu'en
tenant la queue libre.
  Si l'on veut rendre ya un maximum, ou ce qui re-
vient au même        on aura la condition

Les lettres «{3 ab étant dans cette équation les mêmes
nombres que précédemment. On trouve par des sub-
stitutions successives que z est entre o,og et 0,10 on
peut donc pour les applications regarder la valeur
comme éjale à o, 10. Ainsi,pour que la bille soit à l'état
finalde roulementleplus loin possible, il faut la frapper
à environ le dixième du rayon au-dessous du centre.
   Les valeurs maxima de ya et y, sont
   La valeur de W_, en fonction de la distance a de la
ligne du choc au centre de la bille, servira encore à
trouver comment le coup de queue doit être donné
pour rendre un maximum la vitesse horizontale de
rotation des points de l'équateur horizontal, c'est-à-
dire la valeur de Rr, lorsqu'on suppose déjà     R et
par conséquent a h.
On a alors

En prenant les mêmes nombres que précédemment
pour les constantes, on a pour déterminer par la
condition de rendre Rr un maximum, l'équation

En posant                           c= i,33      on aura
h
If= o,5o
et alors on a en même temps
                       Rr = o,; Wo
   Les valeurs et la vitesse Rr en fonction de la lorsqu'on
suppose a =2 h, et par conséquent           R, sont repré-
sentées par les ordonnées PR de la courbe o RR'R",
(fig. 8) les abscisses étant les valeurs de h.
   On peut encore se proposer de rendre un maximum,
la vitesse finale en même temps que la vitesse à l'état
de glissement: ces vitesses sont ^W,    et- D'abord
on prendra A   = o dans ce cas, ce qui donnera

Lorsqu'on met pour et 9 les valeurs numériques
précédentes et qu'on pose toujours a = 0,48, [3 =
0,97 et c  i,33 la condition de maximum par rap-
port à est donnée par l'équation

La racine de cette équation est R = o, 1 9 ainsi il faut
frapper la bille à environ le cinquième du rayon au-
dessus du centre pour rendre W,        un maximum.
  Dans ce cas on a,

                              W, =r
  Les valeurs variables de          lorsqu'on suppose
a =     R ou a = R       sont représentées par les or-
données DH de la courbe h' h H E.'(fîg.g); les abscisses
comptées à partir du point M étant les valeurs de l.
                     CHAPITRE III.

Du choc de deux billes et du carambolage, en négligeant le frotte-
    ment très-petit qui a lieu entre les billes pendant le choc.

  La circonstance du mouvement des billes qu'il est
le plus nécessaire d'étudier pour la pratique du jeu,
c'est ce qui arrive après le choc d'une bille mobile
contre une bille immobile c'est ce problème dont
nous allons nous occuper.
   Le frottement des billes dans le choc est très-faible;
c'est ce que les joueurs reconnaissent et ce qui ré-
sulte d'ailleurs des expériences que je vais rapporter.
   Pour déterminer le frottement de deux billes pen-
dant le choc, j'ai suspendu une bille à un fil et je lui
ai fait une marque propre à bien montrer la rota-
tion qu'elle pouvait prendre. J'ai donné à la bille une
rotation uniforme dont j'ai obtenu exactement la
durée; puis je l'ai choquée horizontalement et obli-
quement avec une autre bille sur l'un des côtés, de
manière à donner par l'effet du frottement une ro-
tation dans un sens opposé à celle qui existait; j'ai
gradué le choc de manière à détruire à peu près
toute la rotation existante, ou au moins à ne laisser
subsister qu'une rotation assez faible pour qu'on pût
en observer la durée pendant les oscillations. Sans
l'influence du frottement pendant le choc, la bille
eût pris un mouvement d'oscillation qui n'eût rien
changé à la rotation existante avant le choc; mais
l'effet de ce frottement produisant, outre la percus-
sion normale passant par le centrc de gravité, une
percussion tangentieite, il en résultait une modifi-
cation dans la rotation.
   Soit MW la quantité de mouvement imprimée par
le choc à la bille en ayant égard au frottement, et
q l'angle de frottement; MW sin. sera la quantité
de mouvement due au frottement; son rapport avec
la quantité de mouvement normale au point de choc
ou MW cos. cp sera tang. q; c'est cette tangente que
l'on désigne par f.
   En appelant Ia la hauteur dont la bille s'est élevée
dans ses oscillations, on aura

  En appelant S2 la différence des vitesses angulaires
avant et après le choc, et R le rayon de la bille, on
aura pour la rotation

  Dans les expériences qu'on a faites, ou avait
R  =  o,oa5; la bille ayant été choquée de manière
qu'eue s'élevait de h =  o,23 on avait détruit par le
choc une vitesse angulaire d'un tou-r par seconde,
ainsi on avait fi=  2r. La valeur de sin. est donc
                     sin. tp   = 0,028,
d'où
                     tang. o = o,o2S.
Ainsi le coefficient   de ce frottement est de 0,028.
  Le frottement des billes n'ayant donc qu'une très-
petite valeur, nous examinerons d'abord les effets
du choc quand on néglige ce frottement.
   On sait que si l'on suspend des billes à des fils
elles présentent dans leur choc les circonstances dues
à une élasticité presque parfaite ainsi on peut l'ad-
mettre dans la pratique du jeu avec une très-grande
approximation. Du reste, si l'on voulait tenir compte
d'un défaut d'élasticité, nous dirons plus loin ce
qu'il faudrait faire, en même temps que, pour com-
pléter la théorie, nous considérons le frottement des
billes. Mais, nous le répétons, ces deux influences
peuvent être négligées ordinairement nous allons
donc commencer par en faire abstraction.
   Prenons d'abord le cas ordinaire du jeu où la bille
mobile, ayant reçu un coup de queue horizontal,
 marche en ligne droite avec les élémens du mouve-
 ment déterminés dans le chapitre précédent.
    En représentant parMD (fig. 6) la distance)' par-
 courue par la bille depuis son point de départ M, et
 par MC la vitesse W, qu'a prise son centre sous le
 coup de queue au moment du choc; les vitcsses 'W de
 translation du centre et zw de rotation du centre de
 percussion sont représentées par les lignes AD et AH.
    L'effet du choc en raison de l'élasticité des billes
 est, comme on sait, de produire entre des masses
 égales un échange des vitesses normales des centres.
 Ainsi la bille du joueur perdra la vitesse normale
  au point du choc, et ne gardera que la vitesse tan-
  gentielle.
    Soit tp l'angle que fait la tangente au point de choc
  avec la direction du mouvement de la bille avant le
  choc, c'est-à-dire avec la direction de la
                                               vitesse W
  et de la vitesse w qui avant le choc,
 la même droite, soit                      se compte sur
                          en sens opposé, soit dans le
 même sens.
     Après le choc, si l'on néglige le frottement
 les billes la rotation
                                                    entre
                          ne sera pas changée; w con-
 servera la même grandeur et la même direction; mais
 la vitesse W sera changée cn sin. Cf,
                                     W
                                          et      dirigée
 danslesensdelatangentehorizontaleau sera        pointdechoc,
  cest-a-dire qu'elle fera
                                avec la direction de W avant
  Je choc un angle            Ainsi, en représentant dans la
                         cp.
 {fig. 1 1) la vitesse W avant le chuc
                                         par AD, cette vitesse
 après le choc deviendra la projection AB de AD
 direction de la tangente                                 sur la
                                 au point de choc. En se re-
 portant donc à la construction de la figure
 {fig. ii) tous les élémens du                       i, on aura
                                       mouvement de la bille
 après le choc en partant des vitesses initiales AB
 AlI. Cette dernière vitesse AH, dans le                      et
 portée ici, est celic du centre de percussion  sens où elle est
                                                    inférieure.
    Si 1 on veut discuter les changemens
                                               dans la marche
 (le la bille lorsque les vitesses AD
                                            et AH restant les
 mêmes au moment où le choc
                                        cummence, on sup-
                                 r
 pose que l'angle varie de à o, c'est-à-dire
                                                         que la
bille du joueur vienne toucher la bille adverse
                                                           plus
ou moins       loin  du  point d'arrière; il suffit alors de
tracer un cercle sur AD
l'on regarde ce cercle           =   W comme diamètre. Si
                              comme représentant l'équateur
horizontal de la bille adverse,
ou le choc s'est fait;                   que T soit le point
                             on mènera la corde A 13 perpen-
sliculaire au rayon RT; cette corde
                                            sera en grandeur
et en direction la vitesse initiale de translation après
le choc, c'est-à-dire la première tangente à la para-
bole décrite par la bille. En se servant ensuite de la

    =
vitesse AB et de la vitesse AH, et de son opposée
AF          AH = Wr, on construira tous les élémens
du mouvement après le choc.
   Ainsi, la direction de la vitesse finale sera celle
de la sécante menée de H au point B du cercle. Pour
avoir le point par lequel doit passer la marche
finale qui est parallèle à cette sécante HB, on ré-
duira les distances FA et FD d'un septième à par-
tir des points A et D; sur la longueur restante 1)'A'
comme diamètre, on décrira un cercle; le rayon
vecteur mené au point M où FB coupe ce cercle,
contiendrale point cherché.On tracera autour de A,
comme centre, un arc de cercle d'un rayon égal
à fg ou à 2ra,45; on tirera le rayon AJ parallèle à
FB; puis, par le point I où ce rayon rencontre HB,
on mènera IL parallèle à JM, et le point L sur AM
sera l'extrémité de la parabole décrite par la bille
avant qu'elle suive la droite LV dans sa marche finale
à partir de ce point L.
   Quel que soit le point où le choc se fasse entre
les billes, la direction de la marche finale étant tou-
jours celle de la sécante HB, partant du point fixe
 H    cette direction ne variera que dans une certaine
 amplitude quand le point H sera extérieur au cercle
 c'est-à-dire quand la rotation sera directe, et qu'ainsi
 AH, qui est la vitesse du centre de percussion infé-
 rieur, devra se porter du côté opposé à W ou AD.
    Si l'on appelle le plus grand angle de déviation
de la marche finale par rapport à la direction AD de
la vitesse W avant le choc on aura

  Et en même temps l'angle qui détermine le point
ou le choc doit se faire pour avoir cette déviation
sera donnée par

  Si au moment du choc la rotation est rétrograde,
et qu'ainsi AH se porte du côté de AD, ce qui échan-
gera les positions des points F et G, comme on le voit
dans la figure 12; alors la direction finale partant
d'un point intérieur Il au cercle, prendra toutes les
directions. La bille reculera dans sa marche finale,
si le point B est en dessous de la perpendiculaire à AD,
menée par le point H. Le cercle sur lequel se trouvent
les points M, lequel a pour diamètre A'D', sort alors
du cercle qui a AD pour diamètre.
   Du reste, la construction du point L, extrémité de
la courbe et commencement de la marche finale par
lequel on doit faire passer la droite finale LV, se fera,
comme on le voit dans la figure t2, en suivant l'ana-
logie avec la figure 1 1
   La condition pour reculer lorsque le mouvement
de rotation sera rétrograde, sera évidemment

  La vitesse W du centre, et la vitesse sv du centre
de percussion   se trouvent toujours par la figure 6
pour chaque point de la course de la bille.
   A mesure que la bille avance, les points D et II doi-
vent rester fixes. Si elle n'est pas arrivée à son état
final, le point A s'approche de D et s'écarte de H. Si
la bille a commencé par avoir un mouvement rétro-
grade, ce qui suppose qu'on l'a frappée avec la queue
au-dessous du centre, le point A se trouve d'abord en
deçà de H, puis il avance, et lorsqu'il passe sur H, la
bille est à l'état de glissement, et alors il n'y a pas de
 courbe décrite après le choc.
    On peut dans la figure 6 reconnaître de suite dans
 quelle direction marchera la bille du joueur après le
 choc au point D de sa marche. Pour cela on tracera
 sur AD un demi-cercle; on le prendra d'abord pour
 représenter l'équateur de la bille adverse et le point T
 pour le point de choc, cet équateur A étant pris
 pour son point d'arrière; on prendra l'arc AB égal au
 double de AT, et en joignant le point H où AD coupe
 l'horizontale PE, avec le point B; la ligne HB don-
 nera la marche finale de la bille. On verra donc ainsi
 quel écart on peut donner au point de choc T pour
 pouvoir reculer après le choc.
    Si l'on choque à l'état de glissement, il n'y a plus de
  rotation pour le centre de percussion, et l'on a w =0;
  A et II de la figure 6 se réunissent en E, alors la bille
  mobile ne se dévie pas de son état initial après le
  choc; elle suit la tangente au point de choc sans dé-
  crire de courbe.
     Quand on choque à l'état final, c'est-à-dire au
  delà du point Q, figure 6; alors on a AH =: AD, ou
  w = 7 W les points F et D de la
                                        figure 1 1 tombent
 en D; la construction devient celle de la figure i3;
 l'angle ty de la déviation maximum est donné
                                              par

  Dans ce cas de la déviation maximum, la distance
ou la vitesse W du centre de la bille du joucur passe du
centre de la bille adverse, étantsR cos. cr, elle devient
                    2 R ces    o,946 R.
Ce résultat montre que quand le choc se fait àl'étatfinal
de la bille du joueur, pour que cette dernière se dévie
du plus grand angle possible après le choc, c'est-à-dire
de 33°, il faut que son centre se dirige à très-peu près
vers le bord apparent de la bille adverse.
  Si l'on veut avoir l'expression de la plus courte dis-
tance ^rde la droite finale au centre A, toujours pour
le cas où le choc a lieu dans l'état final et où l'angle ty
de la déviation est le plus grand, on aura par la for-
mule du premier chapitre
ce qui donne à très-peu près

  Si l'on se rappelle que l'on a pour l'état, final

W, étant la vitesse du centre à l'instant du coup de
queue; on aura à très-peu près

Si l'on prend les plus grandes valeurs de W répon-
dant   *T 2'^0' c'est-à-dire pour un très-fort coup
de queue, et si l'on suppose L= R; on a en mètre
                        t:   = 0,27.
Cette valeur de tt, qui répond à la plus grande dé-
viation, peut être regardée sans erreur sensible
comme la valeur maximum de cette distance à cause
du peu de variation du facteur Wa sin. t|/ dans le voi-
sinage du maximum de §.
   On peut remarquer que si le choc se fait lorsque la
vitesse de rotation du centre de percussion supérieur
étant dirigée dans le sens de la vitesse W, on rx w
W.
                                                      =
     Alors dans la figure 1 1 le point F tombe au centre
 du cercle dont AD est le diamètre. Dans
                                           ce cas, comme
FB est constant pour toutes les positions du point de
choc, la droite finale LV part d'un point pris à une
distance fixe sur AH, et le point L, extrémité de la
parabole, se trouve sur un cercle dont le sommet est
en A.
   Quand le choc se fait avant que la bille ne soit à
l'état de glissement, c'est-à-dire quand elle est à l'état
de rotation rétrograde, la bille reculera d'autantplus
pour un même point de choc, que le rapport sera
plus grand. Cerapport sera d'autant plus grand, qu'on
sera plus près du point de départ A, comme on le voit
dans la fig. 6. En choquant près du point de départ le
rapport est égal à          dont le maximum répond
au point le plus bas où l'on puisse frapper sans que
la queue cesse de quitter la bille après le choc ce
point a été trouvé, dans le chapitre précédent, ré-
            R   1
pondre à          =0,60, ce qui donne      0,40 R.
  En partant de cette valeur de l, voyons ce que de-
vient la perpendiculairen.
On a

Le maximum de sin.^ pour tous les angles <p, c'est-à-
dire pour toutes !es positions du point de choc sur
la bille adverse, est l'unité. A cette valeur répond
à très-peu près le maximun de n, à cause du peu de
variation de W« vers le point qui répond àsin.^= i.
Pour Z~o,4oR, on a w = 0,60 W,
et par suite
                     Wa = 2)i5W,
d'où l'on tire que le maximum de 71 est très-près de
Or, on a vu au chapitre III, que quand on donne le
coup de queue à 0,60 au-dessousdu centre, on a, pour
la vitesse du centre comparée à la vitesse Wo que
prendrait la bille si le même coup de queue était
donné au centre,
                    W, == 0,50 Wo
Ainsi on aura pour la valeur approchée du maximum
de Ti

Ainsi on a à peu près,
                       K   = o,go
Pour un coup de queue ordinaire qui répond à
= 4>8o on aurait à peu près
                       7T = 0,43.

On voit donc que, lorsqu'on recule après le choc, cir-
constance où les courbes sont les plus prononcées, la
distance 7r est assez grande.
   Quant au mouvement de la bille adverse par suite
du choc, lorsque l'on néglige le frottement entre ces
billes, il n'y a aucun calcul à faire pour le déterminer
il est clair qu'il se fera toujours dans le sens de la
normale au point de choc et avec une vitesse de trans-
lation du centre qui sera W sin. <y. La vitesse de rota-
tion de cette bille sera d'abord nulle, et elle deviendra
  W sin. a quand elle sera à son état final.
                    CHAPITRE IV.

Des effets d'un deuxième choc entre deux billes, à
                                                     une petite
                 distance d'un premier choc.

  Si l'on veut examiner
                            ce qui arrivera si la bille du
joueur, après avoir choqué une première bille vient
en choquer une deuxième avant qu'elle ne soit à l'état
final, et pendant qu'elle décrit encore une courbe,
conséquemment pendant que les vitesses W et w sont
non-seulement différentes en grandeur, comme
                                                nous
l'avons déjà supposé dans les problèmes précédens
mais encore différentes en direction; il suffira de
                                                        se
reporter à la construction générale du premier cha-
pitre, en employant pour Wet w les valeurs qui ont
lieu à l'instant de ce deuxième choc. Or, si l'on
       d'abord                                       sup-
pose           que la deuxième bille choquée est assez
près de la première pour
                            que les élémens W et 1V de
la bille du joueur n'aient
                             pas changée sensiblement
entre le premier et le deuxième choc; il suffira de
                                                       re-
marquer que    lorsqu'on néglige le frottement pendant
le choc et l'imperfection de l'élasticité,
                                            comme cela
peut se faire pour des billes ordinaires en bon état,
alors la direction dela vitesse de rotation Ail (fîg. i5)
du centre de percussion inférieur n'éprouve            de
changement. La vitesse W, avant le deuxièmepas     choc,
devient la corde AB menée perpendiculairement au
rayon RT, qui va au point du premier choc T; le
cercle AÏE représentant l'équateur horizontal de la
bille.
   Pour représenter toutes les marches de la bille du
joueur après le deuxième choc lorsque tout restant
de même ce sera seulement le point de ce deuxième
choc qui changera, on décrira sur AB, comme dia-
mètre, un cercle qui représentera d'abord l'équateur
horizontal de l'autre bille; on tirera la corde AB' per-
pendiculaire au rayon R'T' mené au point de choc T'
sur cette deuxième bille, et HB' sera la direction
de la marche finale de la bille du joueur. Il ne restera
plus qu'à avoir le point L extrémité de la courbe dé-
crite, point par lequel il faut faire passer la parallèle
à HB' pour placer la marche finale dans sa véritable
position. Pour cela on fera comme on l'a indiqué au
premier chapitre.
   Le point H devant être toujours pris à la distance
AH=iw du point A au moment du premier choc, il
sera facile de reconnaître dans quelles limites peut
varier la direction finale après le deuxième choc lors-
qu'on fait varier la position du choc, soit sur la pre-
mière, soit sur la deuxième bille. Si le point de choc
varie de position sur la deuxième bille, les directions
finales seront limitées par les deux tangentes menées
du point H au petit cercle décrit sur AB comme dia-
mètre. Lorsque le point H deviendra intérieur à ce
petit cercle, la bille prendra toutes les directions pos-
sibles dans sa marche finale.
   Si l'on fait varier le point de choc sur la première
bille, et en outre sur la deuxième; alors les marches
finales pourront encore être limitées par les tan-
gentes extrêmes menées à la courbe enveloppe du
petit cercle mobile décrit sur les cordes successives
AU, comme diamètre {fig. 16 ).
   Pour avoir l'équation de cette courbe enveloppe,
désignons par x et les coordonnéesdu centre du cer-
cle mobile, lequel centre est aussi sur un cercle; nous
aurons, en appelant R son rayon qui est égal à w
   (A)              «'+£"– aSR = o.
L'équation du cercle mobile est, en posant pour
a bréger   .x'    f
                 + = p'

on obtiendra ainsi les valeurs de e et de (3 au moyen
de ces deux équations; elles sont données par

En substituant dans l'équation (A) après l'avoir multi-
pliée par p4, on trouve
  En développant cette équation, elle devient, après
avoir ôté le facteur et après avoir remplacé x'
                                                 par

ou en extrayant la racine et ne prenant que le signe
positif, le seul qui se rapporte à l'enveloppe cherchée
on a
                      2 Pi (o+y) =p*.
Cette équation donnerait un moyen facile de
                                                    con-
struire la courbe par point. Mais il suffit ici de
                                                      re-
marquer qu'elle est une épicyloïde engendrée par un
cercle d'un rayon égal à R ou à I, qui roule autour
d'un cercle égal, ayant son sommet en A et son centre
sur AD ( fîg. 16).
   En effet, l'équation de cette épicyloïde s'obtient
                                                      en
éliminant l'angle cp entre les deux équations
                 x = 2R sin. tp + R sin. 2'f,
           y R = 2 R cos. y + R cos. 2 nj.
Or, elles deviennent, en mettant pour sin. 29 et
cos. 2cp leurs valeurs
Mettant la valeur de cos. dans l'expression de j on
aura, en divisant tout par y,

équation toute semblable à la précédente. Ainsi cette
épicyloïde est bien l'enveloppe du cercle mobile.
   Par la construction connue de la tangente à l'épi-
cyloïde, on trouverait facilement que quand la rota-
tion est directe au moment du premier choc, la plus
                        |
grande déviation finale qui puisse résulter de deux
chocs successifs est donnée par

  Quand la bille du joueur est à l'état final, le plus
grand angle de déviation résultant de deux chocs
successifs est de 5i° 34'; c'est ce qui résulte de l'ex-
pression ci-dessus en y faisant tv = 7 W.
  On voit par la figure 15 que lorsque le premierchoc
se fait avec une vitesse de rotation rétrograde, c'est-
à-dire lorsque le point II doit se porter en H' du
côté de D; si ce point Il' tombe en dessus du point
Q où le petit cercle coupe à AD, c'est-à-dire où
tombe la perpendiculaire I5Q, abaissée de B, ce qui
revient à la condition pour reculer après le premier
choc dans l'état final; alors, le point de choc
sur la première bille restant le même, si l'on fait
varier le point de choc sur la deuxième bille, les
déviations finales après le deuxième choc sont com-
prises entre les tangentes extrêmes menées par ce
point H' à ce petit cercle.
   Si dans ce même cas le point de choc varie sur la
première bille adverse, alors il n'y a pas de limites
aux directions finales ni après le premier choc ni
après le deuxième.
   Si la deuxième bille adverse, au lieu d'être très-
près de la première s'en trouvait assez distante pour
que dans le trajet de l'une à l'autre les élémens, tels
qu'ils existaient après le choc, eussent pu changer
sensiblement, alors la vitesse AB        W cos. devrait
se changer en AB' (ftg. 17), et les vitesses AF et AH
devraient se changer en AF' et AH'. On peut voir, soit
par la construction de la figure 3, soit dans l'exposé
préliminaire, à l'explication des fig. 56 et 67,58 et 59
la manière d'obtenir la valeur et la direction de ces
vitesses AB', AU' et AF' à l'instant du deuxième choc.
Ayant ces élémens, on décrira un cercle sur AB' comme
diamètre, on reportera le point H en Il' sur la droite
HH'= BB', parallèle à BF, et en menant de H' les
tangentes extrêmes au cercle décrit sur AB' comme
diamètre.on aura ainsi leslimites des déviations finales.
  Si dans ces constructions on voulait avoir égard
à une petite imperfection dans l'élasticité des billes,
on procéderait comme on va l'expliquer dans le cha-
pitre suivant, pour un premier choc. Le cercle ADB
{f'g. 18I devrait d'abord être remplacé par le cercle
un peu plus petit A'fi'D partant du même sommet D;
AB deviendrait AB'. Ensuite le petit cercle au lieu d'être
décrit sur AB' comme diamètre le serait sur A"B égal
à (    a)   AB'; a étant le coefficient qui exprime la
fraction de la vitesse normale conservée par la bille
du joueur après le choc, ou bien à très-peu près,
comme on le fera voir au chapitre suivant, la por-
tion de la force vive perdue par le choc des billes.
   La même modification s'applique au cas d'une lé-
gère inégalité dans les masses seulement si c'était
la bille du joueur qui fût la plus légère, la correction
BB' devrait se porter en sens contraire, en sorte que
le cercle A'B'D au lieu d'être plus petit deviendrait
plus grand que le cercle ABD.
                     CHAPITRE V.

Du choc de deux billes, en ayant égard au frottement entre les
  billes pendant le choc, au défaut d'élasticité et à l'inégalité
  des masses.

    BIEN que l'on puisse regarder les billes comme élas-
tiques dans leur choc entre elles; cependant., comme
cette qualité peut ne pas être aussi parfaite dans cer-
taines billes, on peut, pour compléter la théorie,
prévoir le cas d'un défaut d'élasticité. Ce que nous
dirons s'appliquerait avec la même facilité à l'inéga-
lité de masse des deux billes puisqu'elle produit des
effets tout analogues.
   Lorsque les billes ne sont plus parfaitement élas-
tiques, la bille du joueur, au lieu de prendre toute la
vitesse normale, en conservera une partie, et, en ad-
mettant que la perte de force vive dans le choc reste
en rapport constant avec la force vive avant le choc,
il en sera de même de la vitesse normale qui, étant
avant le choc W sin. <p, deviendra après a W sin. o;
a étant un très-petit coefficient dont la valeur est

ou à très-peu près        t= 9.
9   désignant la perte de force vive qui a lieu dans le
chocs.
     La vitesse de la bille du joueur après le choc, au
  lieu d'être wcos. <?, sera la résultante de wcos. et de
     w sin.
            cf.
                Or, il est facile de voir que si on prend sur
  AD un point K.'{f;g. 14) il une distance AA'=«W,
  et qu'on décrive un cercle sur A'D connue diamètre;
  i! suffira, pour avoir égard au défaut d'élasticité, de
  substituer ce cercle A'B'D au cercle ABD, et de faire
  toutes les constructions comme dans la figures 1 1. En
  effet, AB' sera alors la vitesse résultante de AB =-
  W cos. 9 et de BI3' x W sin. 9.
     On voit donc que le défaut d'élasticité entre les
  billes aurait pour effet de diminuer les angles que les
  directions finalesfont avec la vitesse ADavantle choc.
    Le cercle ABD de la figure 6 doit aussi ètre ditni-
 nué et l'extrémité A du diamètre AD doit s'abaisser
 un peu.
    S'il s'agit non pas d'un défaut d'élasticité mais d'iné-
galité entre les masses des billes; alors si c'est la bille
 du joueur qui est la plus pesante et que son poids dé-
 passe l'autre d'une fraction CI. assez petite pour qu'on
 néglige a'; on aura après le choc
                       BB   = a W sin. o.

    Si « est négatif, c'est-à-dire si la bille du joueur est
 la moins pesante, on prendra BB' (fig. i^bis) dans
 l'autre sens et on aura toujours
                     BB'=-a Wsin. y,
  alors le point A' dans ce dernier cas est hors de AD et
  le cercle A'B'D enveloppc le ccrcle ABD.
     Nous avons dit qu'on pouvait ordinaircment né-
  gliger le frottement qui a lieu entre les billes pendant
  le choc; cependa.nt, comme cela ne se peut plus dans
  certains coups, et comme d'ailleurs toutes les billes
ne sont pas également polies, et qu'il y en a sur les-
quelles ce frottement est plus sensible nous allons
le considérer dans ce chapitre. Les formules et les
constructions que nousétablirons nous serviron t d'ail-
leurs, avec de très-légères modifications, pour le choc
contre la bande, où le frottement n'est jamais négli-
geable.
   En tenant compte du frottement des billesentre elles,
nous pourrons tout-à-fait négliger celui qui se pro-
duit sur le tapis aux points d'appui des billes pen-
dant le choc, puisque celui-ci ne peut résulter que de
la composante verticale de la quantité de mouvement
produite seulement par le frottement entre les billes,
lequel est fort petit d'après les expériences que nous
avons rapportées précédemment. Nous négligerons
aussi, à plus forte raison, la très-petite vitesse verti-
cale que les centres des billes peuvent prendre par
l'effct de ce frottement, cet effet étant détruit par la
résistance du tapis ou rendu insensible par le poids
des billes qui les ramène de suite contre le tapis
 qu'elles ne quittent même pas.
   Occupons-nous d'abord de l'effet du frottement en
 général dans le choc de deux sphères. Posons les
 équations de mouvement de chaque sphère, et pla-
 çons d'abord le plan coordonné des z, x, parallèle au
 plan tangent au point où se fait le choc; ce qui est
 toujours possible si l'on admet que pendant la dui ée
 du choc ce point ait très-peu changé de place.
   Désignons par<I> la force qui se produit au contact
 par l'effet du frottement; cette force agit dans la di-
 rection de la vitesse relative. Donnons aux quantités
 U, Y,p, q, r les mêmes significations que précédem-
 ment pour une des billes nous y ajouterons la vi-
 tesse S dans le sens de l'axe des z. Distinguons par
U', V, S', p', < r' les quantités analogues qui se rap-
                                           i
portent à l'autre bille. En mettant des au bas de
toutes ces lettres, nous désignerons ce que sont ces
quantités à l'instant où le choc commence. Représen-
tons encore par XYZ les composantes de la force au
contact, Y et Z se rapportant au seul frottement <I>
et X à la pression normale.
   Prenons les coordonnées positives du même côté
pour les deux billes, et remarquons que la force qui se
développe par le choc sur une des billes, y compris le
frottement, agitégalementeten sens opposé surTautre;
nous aurons, en vertu de cette réciprocité de la force,

  En raison de ce que le point où se fait le choc se
déplace très-peu pendant sa durée, et reste ainsi sen-
siblement à la même place par rapport aux plans co-
ordonnés, on aura pour les momens
En éliminant Z et Y entre les équations différentielles
et intégrant, on trouve

Cestrois dernières rentrent dans les neuf précédentes.
  Remarquons que dans les équations des momens
on doit ne prendre pour Z et Y que les composantes
du frottement, puisque la force normale a un mo-
ment nul. Remarquons encore que ce frottement agit
dans la direction de la vitesse relative; ainsi,les compo-
santes du frottement qui agit surla première bille seront

ou en désignant pour abréger par 9 le radical qui
exprime la vitesse relative du frottement

    Prenons maintenant les équations qui se rapportent
 à l'une des billes on aura pendant le choc
 ou en divisant les deux dernières équations l'une par
 l'autre

Or, à cause des neuf relations linéaires (A', (B), (C)
entre les douze inconnues U, V, S, U', V, S', p, q, r,
p', q', r! le dénominateur de dV deviendra
                                                une fonc-
tion linéaire de V, et celui de dS une fonction linéaire
de S; ainsi, cette équation différentielle s'intégrera
par logarithmc, et, en passant aux nombres, elle
établira un rapport constant entre les dénominateurs
pendant la durée du choc. Comme ceux-ci sont pro-
portionnels aux cosinus des angles que le frottement
fait avec les axes, il en résulte que ce frottementcp
conserve une directiora constante pesidarat lcz durée du
choc.
  Cette proposition facilite beaucoup l'introduction
du frottement dans le choc des billes puisqu'il suffit
pour avoir sa direction, de la prendre à l'origine du
choc.
   Nous allons maintenant considérer ce frottement
dans le choc d'une bille en mouvement contre une
bilie en repos.
   Nous appellerons toujours ,V la vitesse du centre
de la bille en mouvement       et q l'angle que fait la
direction de cette vitesse avec la tangente au point de
choc.
  La direction du frottement sur le plan tangent
                                                     se
déterminera comme nous avons déterminé celle du
frottement sur le tapis. Il suffira de se rappeler que
les quantités Rp Rq, Rr peuvent être considérées
comme les projections sur les plans coordonnés des
vitesses de rotation des points situés sur des grands
cercles parallèles à ces plans. Prenons pour axe des y
la direction de la tangente au point du choc, c'est-à-
dire celle de la vitesse W cos.  du  centre de la bille,
immédiatement après le choc.
   La vitesse de rotation du point où se fait le choc,
en la considérantcommeétantsur l'équateur horizon-
tal, sera en projection horizontale IV; et la vitesse
de rotation du même point, en la considérant comme
située sur un méridien vertical passant par le point
de choc, c'est-à-dire perpendiculaire à la tangente
horizontale en ce point, aura pour composante ver-
ticale, en la prenant positivement de bas en haut,

  Ainsi   en posant pour abréger

l'angle   que  fait la vitesse au point de choc avec la
direction de la vitesse W cos. 9 tangentielle et ho-
rizontale en ce point, sera déterminée par

cet angle o: sera pris positivement quand il se comp-
tera en dessus du tapis.
  Nous désignons ici   part    le rapport entre le frot-
tement et la quantité de mouvement qui se produit
au contact.
  L'effet du frottement sera de produire sur le centre
de la bille une vitesse horizontale
                     y'Wsin. tp cos. œ,
opposée à la vitesse W cos. y                  et une vitesse ver-
ticale
                          f' sin. a s. a.
                              W          n

Nous ne considérerons pas cette dernière, vu. que son
effet ne peut être sensible sur le mouvement hori-
zontal. D'ailleurs on verra au chapitre VIII que cette
vitesse verticale ne change en rien la clirection de la
marche finale, et. qu'en tous cas, on peut déterminer
son influence sur la courbe décrite.
  Le frottement produira en outre des momens de
rotation qui seront       autour de l'axe des z
                          f   W   sin. c cos. a R
autour de l'axe des.y parallèle à la vitesse W cos. <y.
                   +      f
                        W sin. <p sin. x R.

La vitesse W cos. cpconserveru sa direction etdeviendra
               W   cos.   m
                              fw      sin. (p cos. a
et les quantités R2/»,      Kq, R'r, qui sont les mo-
mens des vitesses de rotation autour des arcs, devien-
dront après le choc

Ainsi, en appelant W' et Rp', Rq', R/, les élémens qui
ont lieu après le choc, on aura

Si l'on pose pour abréger
                      f'W sin.f = (3,
les équations ci-dessus deviennent

Si l'on désigne par u et v les composantes de la vitesse
du centre de percussion supérieur, on aura

Si l'on distingue par des accens les valeurs de et de
                                               u      v
après le choc il viendra
                    u! = u       (3 sin. a,
                       =   Il;
et toujours
                W = W cos. If   cos. a.
En introduisant dans sin. a la relation
et dans celle de cos. a la valeur Rr=
                                           u   =  | R?,
                                           a W« D qui

a lieu après un coup de queue horizontal; on aura, en
signes et en grandeurs, les égalités
il est facile de construire tout ce qui se rapporte à la
marche de la bille après le choc.
   Si l'on avait la longueur (3 et l'angle a, il suffirait de
diminuer W cos. cp, ou AB (fîg. 19) de cos. a, dimi-
nution qui se change en augmentation quand cos. a.
est négatif; et de modifier AH de manière que sa
projection v sur AB ne changeât pas, et que sa projec-
tion 11 sur la perpendiculaire à AB diminuât de (3 sin. a.
Comme sin. a a le même signe que u, il s'ensuit que
ce sera toujours une diminution qu'il faudra faire su-
bir à la grandeur de u, quel que soit son signe.
   Il reste donc à examiner comment on construira
sin. ce et cos. en.
   D'abord si le choc a lieu après un coup de queue
horizontal et avant tout autre choc, la vitesse de ro-
tation w du centre de percussion étant dans la direc-
tion de la vitesse W, ou AD de la figure 20            u sera
la projection   de      w,
                           c'est-à-dire de la vitesse AF de
rotation du point supérieur sur la direction per-
pendiculaire à AB. Ainsi, -] u sera la distance entre
le point F et la ligne AB.
   LaquantitéWcos.qiétantlalongueurABjsil'on porte
sur AB à partir du point A, une longueur AC égale à
"\Y
          laquelle est donnée en fonction de h au moyen
de la figure 8 lorsque /^=R, et si l'on a soin de porter
cette longueur du côté de B si la est positif, et du côté
opposé si la est négatif, c'est-à-dire si le coup de
queue est donné du côté opposé à celui où se fait le
choc sur la bille adverse alors la distance de C à
B, en la prenant dans le sens qui va de C vers B,
c est-à-dire négative si le point C tombe au delà de B,
sera toujours égale en grandeur et en signe à

   Ayant les deux quantités u et W ces.
;W- qui forment les numérateurs de sin.
                                              et cos. a,
il est clair que l'angle sera celui que fait avec AB
                                                     une
ligne CK allant de C vers le point K, pris sur la
                                                     per-
pendiculaire BD à AB, à la même distance de AB
                                                     que
le point F, c'est-à-dire sur le pied de la perpendicu-
laire FK abaissée de F sur DB. Cet angle, en effet,
sera obtus quand cos. a doit être négatif, et son sinus
aura aussi le signe de u, c'est-à-dire de sin. a.
  Si l'on décrit un cercle sur un diamètre DA' = DA
      DA {.fig- 2O) qu'on prolonge DB jusqu'à    ce cer-
 cle, en G; on aura BG==jf' W sin. <p; cette longueur
BG sera ce que nous avons représenté par (3 dans
 les formules précédentes. Si donc on fait tourner
BG autour du point B de manière à l'amener en BB"
dans une direction qui de B vers B"s soit parallèle à
celle qui va de K vers C en projetant BB" en B' sur
AB, la distance AB' sera la valeur de W après le choc,
puisque l'on aura bien
               W'= AB' = W cos. ?     cos.
et cela, quel que soit le signe de cos. a.
    On aura la nouvelle vitesse AH' en transportant le
pointH en H', et le rapprochant de ABdans une direc.
tion perpendiculaire, et d'une distance HH' égale à
£3 sin.
        a, c'est-à-dire à B"B'; puisqu'on aura bien
                   u' =3 u • p sin. a.
  On aura donc ainsi les élémens AU et AH' du mou-
vement de la bille du joueur après le choc, en ayant
égard à l'effet du frottement qui s'est produit entre
elles pendant le choc.
   On doit remarquer que pour avoir la direction fi-
nale H'B', on peut, au lieu de déplacer les deux points
H et B, conserver le point H et alors, au lieu d'em-
ployer le point B' extrémité de AB' pour tirer H'B', on
                                      facile de voir que
se servira du point B", puisqu'il est
HB" est parallèle à H'B'.
  Si la rotation   au lieu d'être directe eût été rétro-
grade au moment du choc, et que w eût changé de
sens, auquel cas le point H eût été en dessus de A
du côté de D, et le point F en dessous alors il est fa-
cile de voir que la construction devient celle qu'on
voit (Jig. 21); BB" y est pris égal à BG et parallèle-
ment à la direction de KC. Le point B" est celui qu'il
faut,joindre à H pour avoir la direction de la marche
finale de la bille du joueur. On aura séparément les
élémens AB' et AH' après le choc, en projetant B"
en B' sur AB, et en déplaçant H de HH'=
                                                B"B' dans
le sens qui va de B" vers B'.
    La direction finale pouvant être toujours tracée par
 le point H, et le frottement n'ayant sur cette direc-
 tion d'autre effet que de transporter B en B" on voit
                               la rotation est directe et
 que ce frottement, quand
 qu'on est dans le cas de la figure 20, a pour effet d'ac-
 croître l'angle que la déviation finale fait avec AD;
 et quand la rotation est rétrograde, comme on le
 voit dans la figure 21 de diminuer cet angle. Ainsi
                                          l'angle aigu que
 son effet en] général est de diminuer
 fait la direction finale HB avec la direction initiale
  AB, c'est-à-dire l'amplitude courbe de la parabole.
     On voit aussi par les figures
                                     20 et 21 commeht cet
 angle est modifié suivant que le
                                     coup de queue est
 donné du côté où se fait le choc
                                    sur la bille adverse
 ou du côté opposé.
    Au lieu de considérer un premier choc après
                                                           le
       de
 coup queue       horizontal, comme nous                de le
 faire, si l'on considère un deuxième choc venons
                                               alors les vi-
tesses W et w au moment du second choc,
 plus sur la même ligne; elles se sépareront ne       seront
                                              et feront un
certain angle. Cet angle sera D AB de la figure 1 5, si Test
le point du premier choc et si la seconde bille
                                                        cho-
quée est tout près de la première. Si elle est à
                                                  une dis-
tance un peu sensible qui permette aux élémens AF
et AD de se rapprocher; on fera d'abord change-
                                               ce
ment comme on l'a indiqué au chapitre précédent où
l'on a traité de ce deuxième choc. Ensuite,
                                                       avoir
égard au frottement dans le deuxième choc,pourn'aura
qu'à employer les constructions précédentes,     on
laissant à AH une direction quelconque. Alors,         en y
comme on a toujours

il suffira de prendre toujours pour     i u la projection
de     w   ou AF' {fig. 22) sur la perpendiculaire à AB.
On voit donc que la construction de l'angle a
d'une manière toute semblable à celle          se fera
                                        que nous ve-
nons d'indiquer.
   On mènera FK, paralléle à AB, jusqu'à
                                         sa rencontre
K avec la corde D'B;
                     en prenant CA– W h sur AB,
la ligne CK fera l'angle a
                           avec AB. On n'aura plus,
pour obtenir l'effet du frottement pour toutes les
positions du point T' du deuxième choc, qu'à décrire
ledemi-cercle D'GA' sur (i 4- fj AD' comme diamètre,
et à faire tourner la partie BG de la corde D'B pour
l'amener en BB" dans une direction parallèle et op-
posée à CK. La droite IIB" sera la direction de la mar-
che finale de la bille après le deuxième choc.
   Si l'on veut séparément les deux élémens AB', AH'
après ce deuxième choc, pour tracer la courbe et la
position de la marche finale; on fera comme précé-
demment, on projettera B" sur AB en B' puis on dé-
placera H d'une distance ÏIH' = B"B', et dans une di-
rection parallèle à B"B' en se rapprochant de AB les
vitesses AB' et AH' seront celles qu'on devra employer
                                            la bille du
pour déterminer la courbe décrite par
joueur après le deuxième choc par suite de l'effet du
frottement des billes.
   En vertu de l'équation posée plus haut,

On voit que la vitesse horizontale de rotation de l'é-
quateur horizontal, qui ne s'altère pas sensiblement
pendant le mouvement de la bille sur le tapis, sera
                                      Elle aura été portée
un peu changée par l'effet du choc.
dans le sensrétrograde de cos. a, ou     de    BB', si cos.x
 est positif, et dans le sens direct si cos. a est négatif.
Ainsi dans le cas où l'on voudra traiter un deuxième
 choc contre une autre bille, il faudra alors, au lieu
 d'employer AC {fig. 20 et 2 1), se servir de AC' le point
 C ayant été ainsi porté de C vers C' dans la direction de
 B vers B', et d'une quantité CC' égale aux de la dis-
 tance BB'.
   La bille adverse, immobile avant le choc, marche-
rait toujours en ligne droite en suivant la normale au
contact sans la légère influence du frottement entre
les billes pendant le choc. Pour avoir son mouvement,
eu égard à ce frottement, on remarquera que sa vi-
tesse de translation serait représentée par la corde
J3D (Jîg. 23), et que sa vitesse de rotation serait nulle
s'il n'y avait pas l'influence du frottement.; Or, en
vertu de ce que ce frottement sur cette bille adverse
est égal et directement opposé à celui qui se produit
sur la bille du joueur, on aura la marche finale de la
bille adverse en joignant le point D au point B" con-
struit comme dans la figure 20; seulement cette mar-
che se dirigera de B" vers D. Si l'on veut, non pas seu-
lement la direction de cette marche, mais la gran-
deur des élémens W et w après le choc, pour tracer
la courbe décrite et placer la marche finale, parallèle
à B"D, dans sa véritable position; on prendra B'D pour
la valeur et la direction de la vitesse W du centre, et
 B"B' pour la valeur et la direction de la vitesse de ro-
tation précédemment désignée par AH, c'est-à-dire la
vitesse de rotation du centre inférieur de percussion
ou, si l'on veut, B'B" pour la vitesse de rotation du
centre de percussion supérieur.
   La construction précédente montre que la direction
finale B"D s'écarte de la direction initiale IYD d'un
angle qui est très-petit par rapport à l'angle déjà très-
petit BDB' de la déviation initiale. Ainsi, il n'y a pas
de courbe sensible décrite par bille adverse par l'effet
du frottement pendant le choc.
   Il est clair que l'effetdu frottement dans le choc sera
de donner à la bille adverse une vitesse de rotation v;
ou AH égale à la variation de celle de la bille du joueur
et en sens contraire de cette vitesse. Ainsi, si l'on vou-
lait considérer l'influence de cette vitesse de rotation
dans un choc de cette bille adverse, soit contre une
autre bille, soit contre la bande, il faudrait la prendre
rétrograde quand celle du joueur est directe, et la
prendre directe quand celle du joue ur est rétrograde.
   Lorsque la vitesse w est rétrograde au moment du
choc comme dans la figure 21, la même construction
s'appliquera à la marche finale de la bille adverse elle
sera donnée par la direction de la droite B"D. Dans ce
cas B'D sera la vitesse W de cette bille en grandeur et
en direction et DB' sera en grandeur et en direction
de la valeur de w, ou la vitesse du centre de percus-
sion de cette même bille adverse.
   Si la bille adverse est choquée
                                   par la hille du,joueur
peu après un premier choc, c'est-à-dire quand les
vitesses W et w font un certain angle avant le choc,
comme dans la figure 22; la direction finale du mou-
vement de la bille adverse sera donnée par la droite
D'B" de cette figure.
   Si l'on veut considérer la vitesse de rotation hori-
zontale Rr de l'équateur horizontal de la bille adverse;
il est clair qu'elle sera égale     cos.a   ou à BB', et
qu'il faudra la prendre en sens contraire de BF",
c'est-à-dire qu'on la portera dans le sens de B'vers B.
   Toutes ces influencesdu frottement sont très-faibles,
comme on l'a dit, pour des billes bien polies; mais il
était bon de reconnaître dans quel sens elles modi-
fient la marche des billes quand les frottemens ne sont
pas négligeables pour des billes un peu dégradées.
                      CHAPITRE VI.

Du choc contre la bande, soit directement, soit après un autre choc.

  EXAMINONS ce  qui arrive lorsque la bille du joueur
vient rencontrer la bande, son centre ayant une vi-
tesse W qui fait un angle avec cette bande, et les
élémens du mouvement de rotation étant Rp, Rq, Rr,
en les rapportant à la bande pour axe des j et en
prenant les x du côté du billard.
   Pour avoir les élémens du mouvement après le
choc, nous désignerons par e un coefficient fraction-
naire numérique, tel que la vitesse normale rendue
par la bande après le choc soit représentée par
                           s W   sin. q.
La quantité de mouvement produite par la bande sur
la bille pendant le choc sera
                    W sin. (       (
                               + e ).
étant   le coefficient de frottement pendant le choc
contre la bande, la quantité de mouvement due à ce
frottement pendant le choc sera
                      /.(i+e)     W    sin.y,
Soit pour abréger^ (i+e           ):=/ cette quantité de
mouvement sera exprimée par
                           .1" W sin. cp.
  Nous indiquerons plus loin le moyen de déterminer
le coefficient ¡; par quelques expériences sur le bil-
lard.
   D'après ces expériences, nous avons reconnu que f
devait être pris un peu pius faible que pour le cas de
la simple pression due au poids de la bille dans sa
marche sur le tapis, et qu'il fallait le porter au cin-
quième de la quantité de mouvement produite pen-
dant le choc.
   En suspendant une bille à un fil et la faisant frap-
per contre la bande où elle arrivait lorsque le fil était
dans une position verticale, nous avons trouvé, par
une série de plus de cinquante expériences pour des
vitesses depuis 0,20 par seconde jusqu'à 7,oo, que le
coefficient e restait assez près de o,55. Il se tient à
0,60 pour de faibles vitesses; il baisse ensuite un peu
et se réduit à o,5o pour la vitesse de 7,00. La marche
de sa valeur, par rapport aux vitesses, est représentée
sous la figure 33 bis, où la courbe qui est tracée a pour
abscisses les vitesses W du choc normale, et pour or-
données les vitesses rendues par la baude c'est-à-dire
les valeurs de s W.
    Comme; d'après les formes des bandes, le point de
choc se trouve à peu près à la hau teur du centre des bil-
 les, la direction du frottement se déterminera par l'an-
 gle a que fait la vitesse au point de choc avec la direc-
tion de la bande du côté de la composantede la vitesse
 de la bille dans le sens de cette baude ou le prendra
 positif en dessus du tapis et négatif en dessous. Sin.
                                                         a
 et cos. a. s'expriment ici comme dans le cas du choc
de deux billes. Ainsi étant l'angle que fait avec la
 bande la vitesse W de la bille avant le choc, et u étant
la vitesse de rotation du centre de percussion supérieur
projetée sur une perpendiculaire à la bande, et Rr
étant toujours la vitesse de rotation horizontale des
points de l'équateur horizontal on aura

w étant ici   une abréviation résultant de l'équation

   En désignant comme à l'ordinaire les élémens du
mouvement avant le choc par U, V, Rp, Rq et Rr, et
ces élémens après le choc par U', V', et Rp', Rÿ et R/,
et prenant pour axe des j ou des V la direction de la
bande du côté de la vitesse avant le choc, et pour
axe des x ou des U positifs la perpendiculaire à la
bande du côté du billard; on aura

  En introduisant les composantes de la vitesse du
centre de percussion, que nous avons désignées par u
et v, et qui ont avec Rp et Rg des relations
  En posant comme précédemment        f' W sin.      (3,
on aura

  Si l'on avait   U' = o, ces équations rentreraient
tout-à-fait dans celles qui ont donné le mouvement
après le choc de deux billes parfaitement élastiques;
il n'y aura donc d'autre modification à faire auxcons-
tructions qui ont été expliquées dans le chapitre pré-
cédent, que de donner en plus à la vitesse initiale de
translation de la bille après le choc une composante
e
  W sin. perpendiculaire à la bande et du côté du
          cj>
biliard.
   Ainsi, après avoir tracé la direction incidente AD
(fig. 24) on abaissera la perpendiculaire DO à la
bande, on la prolongera du côté du tapis d'une quan-
tité OB   = g
              DO; DO étant ici la vitesse W sin.
                                                   q, il
s'ensuit que AB sera la vitesse que prendrait la bille
après le choc sans l'influence du frottement.
   Si le choc a eu lieu après un coup de queue hori-
zontal est sans que la bille du joueur ait rien choqué
auparavant, le point H sera sur la direction de la vi-
tesse AD ou du côté opposé si la rotation est directe.
   Pour avoir le mouvement après le choc, il suffira
de modifier les vitesses AB et AH en raison du frotte-
ment contre la bande, absolument comme nous avons
indiqué qu'on devait les modifier par l'effet du frotte-
ment dans le choc de deux billes.
   On prendra sur AD la distance AF = TV =           AH
du côté opposé au point H; par le point F on mènera
la ligne FK parallèle à la bande, et par le point D la
ligne DK perpendiculaireà cette même bande. En por-
tant la longueur Rr ou        W, de A vers C si h est

positif, et du côté opposé si h est négatif, et joignant
C et K; la droite CK fera l'angle
                                   « avec la bande.
   La quantité BB", dont la grandeur doit être portée
dans la direction parallèle à KC, est égale à/(i-|- 2)
W sin. cj), c'est-à-dire qu'elle sera la fraction/, de la
longueur DB. Prenant donc BB" =/ DB, et dirigeant
BB" parallèlement à KC, on aura le point B" par lequel
devra passer la direction finale quand on la fera par-
tir du point H.
   Si l'on veut avoir non-seulementla direction de la
marche finale, mais la position ainsi que la courbe dé-
crite il faudra construire séparément les élémens
AB' et AH', qui ont lieu après le choc, comme lors-
qu'il s'agissait du choc entre deux billes.
   On projettera B" en B' sur BB' parallèle à la bande
(fîg.24 et 25); AB' sera la vitesse W après le choc. En
déplaçant H d'une quantité HH' égale à B"B', et dans la
direction qui va de B" vers B', c'est-à-dire qui se rap-
proche de la bande perpendiculairement, AH' sera la
valeur de w après le choc. On aura ainsi au moyen
des élémens AB' et AH' tout ce qui concerne la
marche de la bille après le choc.
   Quand la bille arrive contre la bande dans son état
final de roulement, le point F tombe sur le point D;
alors la construction devient celle de lafigure 26.Si en
même temps la queue a frappé au centre de la bille, le
point C reste en A, alors la construction devient celle
de la figure 27, où CK se confond avec AD.
  Si le choc a lieu lorsque la vitesse de rotation est
rétrograde, les points H et F échangent leur position.
La construction devient celle de la figure 28; la di-
rection de HB" ou de la parallèle H'B' est celle de la
marche finale, et AB' et AH' sont les directions et les
grandeurs des élémens W et w après le choc.
  On doit remarquer aussi que l'élément Rr avant le
choc, ou AC sur les figures précédentes, se modifie
par l'effet du choc et qu'il devient Rr  (3 cos. Ainsi
la nouvelle valeur AC à employer dans un deuxième
choc contre la bande s'obtiendrait en déplaçant le
point C en C' d'une grandeur CC'        ± BB', et dans le

sens opposé à cos. a, c'est-à-dire dans le sens de B vers
B' ou de 0 vers C..
   Dans le cas où la bille du joueur vient d'en choquer
une autre avant de frapper la bande, et que la distance
entre cette bille adverse et la bande est assez petite
pour que les élémens AB etAH n'aient pas repris leurs
valeurs finales; alors, au moment du choc contre la
bande, lesélémensABetAH (Jîg.i<^) ne sont plus sur
la même ligne, ils font entre eux un certain angle. En
se reportant à ce qui a été dit pour le choc de deux
billes, on verra qu'en désignant par it la projection
de la vitesse du centre de percussion supérieur sur
une perpendiculaire à la bande, on a toujours
 étant la valeur de

   On construira évidemment ces valeurs comme dans
le cas précédent, à cela près que la ligne FK, parallèle
à la bande, partira du nouveau point F, extrémité de
la ligne AF:= AH et portée dans la direction oppo-
sée à AH.Le reste de la construction sera en tout sem-
blable aux précédentes. Dans le cas où la vitesse de ro-
tation est rétrograde au moment du choc,onmodifiera
la construction comme on le voit dans la figure 3o.
   Il est facile de voir que les marches après le choc
conduiront à des droites, et que les courbes disparais-
sent si au moment du choc la vitesse w ou AH est
nulle.
   La figure 3i montre une application d'un deuxième
choc contre la bande, après un premier choc contre
une bille. Elle suppose que le coup de queue a été
donné à gauche et assez haut pour qu'au moment du
choc contre la bande, les élémens soient AD        W et
 AH -iv. On voit par la construction de la marche
 finale et du point L, extrémité de la courbe, que la
bille du joueur vient ricocher contre la bande.
    En prenant en considération les résultats de ce cha-
 pitre, on peut déterminer par expérience le coefficient
f, du frottement dans le choc contre la bande, si l'on
a déjà le coefficient E.
  Pour cela il suffira de jouer contre la bande
bien perpendiculairement, en donnant le coup de
côté et à la hauteur du centre, et en plaçant la bille
assez près de la bande pour qu'elle y arrive à l'état
de glissement. Si le coup de queue se donne un peu
loin de la bande, il suffira de frapper la bille un peu
en dessous du centre pour qu'elle arrive à l'état de
glissement au moment du choc. En appelant l'angle
que forme la marche au retour avec la normale à la
bande, il est facile de voir, soit par les formules, soit
par les constructions, qu'on aura

Cette tangente sera donnée par expérience en exami-
nant le point où la bille revient toucher la bande
opposée. Ainsi, connaissant E, on tirera de là la valeur
de/. Comme il est assez difficile d'être sûr que la bille
est arrivée contre la bande à l'état de glissement, on
répétera le coup de queue un grand nombre de fois,
et l'on observera chaque fois la tangente de l'angle ty
avec la normale. Or, comme e varie assez pour diffé-
rentes vitesses, on se trompera très-peu en le regar-
dant comme constant pour les différens coups qu'on
aura donnés avec l'intensité la plus constante possi-
ble tang. <J, n'aura donc varié qu'en raison de la
                                                     ro-
tation horizontale, c'est-à-dire de la valeur de w. Mais
comme tang. prend son maximum pour zv == o, ainsi
que le montrent les constructions indiquées dans ce
chapitre, il s'ensuit qu'en observant ce maximum
parmi un grand nombre de coups, on aura alors

ce qui donner au moyen de E. C'est ainsi que j'ai été
conduit à prendre/ = 0,20.
                      CHAPITRE VIL

Cas particulier où il faut modifier les formules et les constructions
         relatives à l'effet du frottementpendant le choc.

   LORSQUE le point de la bille du           joueur qui vient
choquer, soit une autre bille, soit la bande, à une vi-
tesse propre dont la direction fait avec la normale au
point de choc un angle inférieur à une certaine limite,
alors les phénomènes de mouvement changent de na-
ture. L'effet du frottement pendant le choc n'est plus
de produire une quantité de mouvement dans le rap-
port constante avec la quantité de mouvement qui
s'est produite normalement au point de contact entre
les deux corps; mais de forcer le point de la bille mo-
bile qui est venue toucher l'autre corps à adhérer à ce
dernier, et à ne s'en séparer que par rotation et non
plus par glissement. Dans ce cas le frottement doit
être assimilé à une quantité de mouvement capable
d'annuler la vitesse tangentielle au point de contact.
   Pour calculer cette quantité de mouvement, dési-
gnons-la par Q; désignons par S la petite vitesse verti-
cale que prend le centre de la bille par l'effet du choc,
vitesse que nous avons négligée dans les calculs
précédens comme n'influant pas sensiblement sur la
marche de la bille, mais qu'il faut considérer ici. Re-
présentons toujours par V et U les autres compo-
santes de la vitesse du centre dans le sens de la tan-
gente et de la normale au point de choc; par W la
vitesse résultante de U et de V, et par l'angle que W
fait avec la tangente. Désignons par p', q, il, -U', V', S',
les élémens du mouvement après le choc rapportés
toujours à la direction de la tangente au point de
choc pour axe des y, nous aurons, en désignant
toujours par M la masse de la bille

Pour que la vitesse tangentielle au point de choc soit
nulle, il faut qu'on ait

ce qui donnera
                       S'–     =   <

Bq étant rapporté ici à la tangente
                                    au point de choc
               j.
pour axe des Or, les deux membres de            deux
                                                 ces
équations sont des vitesses qui sont précisément les
numérateurs des expressions qui nous ont servi à
construire cos. a et sin.«: leur résultante– est donc
représentée par les ? de la distance CK dans toutes les
figures qui se rapportent aux effets du frottement, soit
avec la bande soit entre les billes.
   Mais puisque cette résultante suffit pour retenir
le point de choc et pour l'empêcher de glisser, il n'y
aura pas glissement toutes les fois qu'on aura pour
le choc contre la bande

   En se reportant aux figures de 24 à 3o      la condi-
tion ci-dessus devient

   Ainsi, à partir du point où cette inégalité est satis-
faite, au lieu de prendre la distance BB" égale à
                   f, (1 + ) W sin. m,
                          e

on prendra

  Ceci s'applique au choc entre les billes comme au
choc contre la bande; ce sera la longueur BG == BB",
dans les figures de 22 à 2Z qui devra être prise égale
à  CK toutes les fois qu'on aura
                 CHAPITRE VIII.

           De l'effet du coup due queue incliné.

  LORSQUE l'on donne à la queue une inclinaison par
rapport au tapis, il se produit un double choc, l'un
entre la queue et la bille, l'autre entre la bille et le
tapis. Il faut avoir égard à ces deux chocs simultanés
si l'on veut déterminer le mouvement de la bille.
   Nous nous remporterons ici à ce que nous avons dit
au commencement du deuxième chapitre sur la
direction de la quantité de mouvement due au choc de
la queue, et nous la prendrons par conséquent dans
la direction mcmc du choc, c'est-à-dire de l'axe lon-
gitudinal de la queue.
   Nous appellerons ligne du choc la ligne menée par le
point où la queue frappe la bille dans la direction de
Taxe de la queue et plan vertical du choc le plan ver-
tical mené par cette ligne du choc.
   Nous poserons les notations suivantes
   Q, quantité de mouvement due au choc de la queue
dans la direction de l'axe de cette queue. En repré-
sentant par W, la vitesse que prendrait le centre de
la bille sous le même coup de queue donné au même
point si le choc contre le tapis ne modifiait pas cette
vitesse; on aura Q =NIW,.
   p. angle que fait la direction du choc avec le plan
du tapis.
   h, distance horizontale entre le centre de la bille et
le plan vertical du choc cette quantité étant positive
quand ce plan sera à droite du centre, et négative dans
le cas où il sera à gauche.
   k, la distance entre la ligne du choc et l'horizontale
menée par le centre perpendiculairement au plan
vertical du cboc k étant positif quand la ligne du
choc tombe en dessus de cette horizontale, et négatif
quand elle tombe en dessous.
   F, la quantité de mouvement due au frottement
entre la bille et le tapis pendant le choc.
   Ui V p, q, rt les élémens ordinaires du mouvement
de translation et de rotation de la bille après le choc.
   La vitesse au point d'appui a pour composante
suivant les axes,
                    U, +     et V,
Cette vitesse, que nous désignons par         aura pour
valeur

Les momens de la quantité de mouvement Q autour
des trois axes seront
   Autour de l'axe des x           Qk,
   Autour de l'axe des y           Qh sin. p,
   Autour de l'axe des z           QA cos. IL,

en prenant toujours comme positifs les momens des
forces ou quantités de mouvement qui font tourner
de gauche à droite autour des axes du côté des coor-
données positives.
  Les momens du frottement F au point d'appui se-
ront

   En employant ici le principe sur l'équivalence cntre
les quantités de mouvement dues aux forces motrices
et aux vitesses qu'elles produisent, nous aurons

   On n'écrit pas ici l'équation qui se rapporte à la
vitesse verticale de bas crr haut que pourrait prendre
la bille par l'élasticité du tapis. Cette élasticité est as-
sez faible pour qu'on puisse négliger la vitesses qu'elle
donnerait pour les coups de queue ordinaires lorsque
l'angle n'est pas très-grand ni ie coup très-fort. Mais
au reste, si la hille ressaute, les vitesses U, ~Vtpiq, r,
se rapporteront à l'instant où elle retombe sur le plan
aussi bien qu'à l'instant où elle le quitte, puisque dans
l'intervalle ces quantités n'auraicut pas changé. Il n'y
aurait d'autre effet de l'élasticité que l'augmentation
du frottement pendant le choc puisqu'il est en
rapport avec la quantité de mouvement perdue par
le choc vertical. Mais comme on va voir que l'inten-
site du frottement n'a pas d'influence dans les prin-
cipaux résultats que nous allons donner, il s'ensuit
qu'il en est de mêmedel'élasticité du tapis qui rendrait
une certaine quantité de mouvement vertical à la
bille. Ainsi le seul effet de cette élasticité, si elle fait
ressauter la bille, serait de changer un peu les coor-
donnés de départ qui ne devraient se compter que du
point oû elle est quand elle retombe, et de modifier ce
qui dépend spécialement de l'intensité du frottement
pendant le choc. L'expérience montre que ce ressaut
n'est pas sensible dans les coups de queue d'une inten-
sité ordinaire quand on ne tient pas la queue très-
inclinée ainsi nous en ferons d'abord abstraction
pour traiter les effets des coups de queue ordinaires.
   Quoique les équations (A) ci-dessus paraissent du
second degré à cause duradica10, cependan tles valeurs
de U, V, p, qt deviennent très-simples les calculs
montrent qu'elles s'obtiennent en substituant dans
les fractions             -et      pour U,V,p, et qt, ce
que seraient ces quantités s'il n'y avait pas de frotte-
ment sur le tapis; c'est-à-dire en y substituant

On arrive à ce résultant en tirant d'abord les cinq in-
connues ci-dessus en fonctions de       et substituant
dans l'équation

laquelle donnc la valeur de 6,
  Si l'on pose pour abréger

Au reste, on n'aurait pas besoin de cette résolution
pour prévoir ces valeurs. Il aurait suffi de remarquer
que le frottement ne se développe que par l'effet du
mouvement déjà commencé; il doit prendre d'abord
la direction qui résulte des valeurs que prennent les
rapports
                      et donnant
                          en           à U V p q les
valeurs qu'auraient ces quantités sans l'influence du
frottement et comme il est facile d'établir qu'il ne
change pas de direction pendant la durée du choc, il
s'ensuit que la quantité du mouvement totale qu'il
produit, décomposée dans le sens des axes sur le tapis,
donne bien les valeurs

Voici comment on peut démontrer qu'en effet le frot-
tement ne peut changer de direction pendant la
durée du choc.
  Désignons par n la force produite par la queue, et
                                                    le
par ? celle qui se produit pas le frottement contre
tapis; nous aurons par le principe général de dyna-
mique,

                M   dt    =   »   &    + n cos. i>.

  Les quantités k, h et ne changeant pas sensible-
ment pendant la durée du choc, on pourra intégrer
en les regardant comme contantes. Si l'on prend donc
les intégrales à partir du commencement du choc,
c'est-à-dire à partir de l'instant où toutes les vitesses
sont nulles, et jusqu'à la fin du choc, lorsqu'on a
U=U,,V V,,p=p,,q = q1,r=^rl; on aura

                                           dt,

   Pour que ces équations apprennent quelque chose,
 c'est-à-dire qu'elles donnent celles qu'on emploie or-
dinairementcommeapplicationdu principe de d'Alem-
bert ou, en d'autres termes, pour démontrer que ce
principe a lieu en calculant la direction du frotte-
ment comme étant celle de la vitesse de glissement
au point d'appui à la fin du choc, il faut montrcr
qu'on peut remplacer les intégrales

c'est-à-dire que les rapports         et        restent
constans pendant la durée du choc si cela n'était
pas, on ne connaîtrait nullement le rapport qu'il y
a entre les intégrales ci-dessus, et par suite le prin-
cipe de d'Alembert n'apprendrait rien pour la solu-
tion de la question.
   Or, par la forme des équations différentielles ci-
dessus, on reconnaît qu'elles admettent comme in-
tégrale la relation
                 U +   = A(V     R/>),
A étant une constante qui doit être déterminée con-
venablement.
  En effet, cette équation satisfait aux conditions
initiales, U t=2 o Yz=zo,pï=io,c[ o: de plus, en la
différentiant, on a
                 dU + Rdq = A (dV Rdp).
  En substituant ici les valeurs de dU, dV       ~Rdp
Rdq tirées des équations ci-dessus, on a

  Cette équation se réduit à
                U +    = A(V– R/>).
C'est la relation même d'où l'on est parti; ainsi elle
est une intégrale des équations différentielles du pro-
blème. Cette intégrale est bien dans la solution dy-
namique de la question. Car on prouverait facile-
ment qu'il n'y a pas deux solutions analytiques à
partir des initiales U=oV=o/)™o^f = o r=^o, parce
qu'il n'y a pas de solution singulière pour ces ini-
tiales.
  Ayant établi que le rapport    est          constant
pendant la durée du choc il en est de même des rap-
ports

Ainsi on peut mettre dans ces rapports, soit les pre-
mières, soit les dernières vitesses qui ont lieu pen-
dant le choc et les faire sortir des intégrales on aura
ainsi
  On voit donc que les équations ordinaires fournies
par le principe de d'Alembert se trouvent justifiées.
Les quantités /cp dt, f-ndt sont ce qu'on appelle les
quantités de mouvement dues au choc de la queue et
au frottement.
  Les rapports U+R et V– Rp ±- restant constans
pendant le choc et ayant les valeurs qui résultent de

il s'en suit qu'au lieu de remplacer U Yp q dans les rap-
ports                    par U, V, p, q, on peut mettre
les valeurs constantes et cou nues de ces rapports telles
qu'on les déduit de l'équation ci-dessus, ce qui fournit
précisémentles équations (B) trouvées par la résolu-
tion des équations (A).
   Nous simplifierons un peu ces équations (B) en
posant fu dt ou bien Q •-= MW,, c'est-à-dire en appelant
W, la vitesse que prendrait le centre de la bille par
l'effet du même coup de queue si le tapis ne modifiait
pas cette vitesse. Nous désignons par/; lecoefficientpar
lequel il faut multiplier la quantité de mouvement
normale au tapis pour obtenir celle qui est due au
 frottement, ce qui reviendra à poser /cp dt ou F =
f. MW, sin. p. Nous aurons ainsi pour les valeurs (B),

   Silecoup était assez incliné et le tapis assez élastique
pour que labille ressautàt un peu après le coup, il fau-
drait considérer la vitesse verticale rendue après ce
choc; en la désignant par S, et représentant par e la
fraction de la vitesse normale au tapis qui est rendue
après le choc; on aura
                      S   =   e
                                  W, sin. fl-
  Le coefficient f devra alors être changé en! (i + e).
  Deplus, on doit remarquer que les élémens UVp</r>
qui ont lieu immédiatement après le choc au mo-
ment où la bille ressaute et quitte le tapis, n'éprouve-
ront aucun changement tant qu'elle sera en l'air, et
 qu'au point où elle retombera elle possédera ces
 mêmes élémens de mouvement. Il suffira donc de les
 appliquer au point où elle retombera, en ayant égard
 au nouveau choc qui se produit, pour connaître de
 même la marche de la bille à partir de ce point.
 Il n'y aura d'autre modification dans les constructions
 qu'on indiquera plus loin pour avoir la marche à
 l'aide de ces élémens, qu'à les faire partir du point
du tapis où la bille retombe. Ce point sera sur la
résultante de U, et V·, direction dont nous donne-
rons plus loin la construction.
   Lorsqu'on veut seulement obtenir les vi tesscs finales
désignées par U Va p^ q, r, dans le premicr chapitre et
examiner quelle direction suit la bille daii£ la marche
finale, on n'a pas besoin de connaître les valeurs
des termes qui dépendent du frottement. En effet,
on a trouvé

  Or, en mettant ici les U, et V tels que les four-
nissent les premicrs membres des équations (A), on
voit que tous les termes dépendant du frottement
disparaissent, et l'on trouve ainsi

Ces valeurs subsisteront quand même la bille res-
sauterait par l'élasticité du tapis car cela ne changera
en rien les formes des valeurs des vitesses initiales
U,, V_, Rpt Rg:t Rr il n'en résulterait qu'une aug-
mentation dans le frottement; mais comme il dispa-
raît dans U. et \a ces quantités n'en sont nullement
modifiées.
   La quantité Rcos. ^+A" n'est autre chose que la
perpendiculaire abaissée du point d'appui de la bille
sur le plan passant par la ligne du choc, et par l'ho-
rizontale perpendiculaire à sa direction; ou bien en-
core c'est la distance entre cette ligne du choc et l'ho-
rizontale tracée par le point d'appui perpendiculaire-
ment à sa direction. Si nous désignons par l, comme
nous l'avons déjà fait, la hauteur où la ligne du choc
vient percer le plan vertical des xz, c'est-à-dire celui
qui est mené par le centre de la hille perpendiculaire-
ment au plan vertical du choc; on aura évidemment
                   R cos. lU. + k   1 cos.

  Les expressions ci-dessus pourront donc s'écrire
ainsi qu'il suit

  Ces valeurs renferment plusieurs conséquences re-
marquables sur les effets du coup de queue.
   Pour que la bille marche en ligne droite et ne dé-
vie pas, il faut que l'on ait V,=o, ce qui exige qu'on
ait ou «=:o, ou A = o. Ainsi,
   La bille n'ira en ligne droite, dans la direction de la
queue, qu'autant que cette direction sera horizontale;
ou bien, si elle ne l'est pas qu'autant que le plan ver-
tical du choc passera par le centre de la bille.
   La bille ira toujours en ligne courbe toutes les fois
que la queue ne sera pas horizontale, et que le plan
vertical du claoc ne passera pas par son centre.
   Le signe deU, indique de quel côté la bille marchera
dans son état final par rapport au plan vertical mené
par son centre dans la direction du coup de queue.
Or, ce signe de Ua étant le même que celui de h, il
s'ensuit que, toutes les fois qu'on tient la queue incli-
née et que le plan vertical du choc ne passe pas par
 le centre de la bille, celle-ci décrit une ligne courbe
qui se separe de la direction dit choc, en se portant du
côté où est situé le point dit choc, ou
                                         en termes plus
abrégés que la bille se clévie de la direction du choc
en se portant dit côté où elle a été farppée.
  La tangente de l'angle <\> de la déviation finale de
la bille est égale au rapport des vitesses finales S,
ainsi on aura

   On peut voir ce que représente cette expression
                                                       en
 considérant le point R, (jig. 34), où la ligne du choc
va percer le tapis. Dans cette figure la partie supé-
rieure est une projection sur le plan vertical du choc,
et la partie inférieure une projcction
                                        sur le tapis. Les
cercles représentent la bille dans
                                        une proportion
agrandie par rapport à la longueur que nous indique-
rons plus loin comme représentant la vitesse W,.
   La distance hR du point R à celui où le plan vertical
du choc PR coupe la perpendiculaire Ah à direction
                                                sa
tracée sur le tapis par le point d'appui A, a
                                                pour valeur

De plus la distance Ah sur la figure 34, est la quantité
h, ainsi on a

Ainsi, l'angle de la déviation finale est précisément
celui que fait AR avec la direction AB. La ligne AR
est donc parallèle à la marche finale de la bille.
  On arrive donc à cette conséquence fort simple
que la direction finale du mouvement de la bille est
parallèle à la ligne qui va de son point d'appui au point
où la signe du choc perce le tapis.
   En vertu de ce théorème, la billefiniraitpar reculer,
c'est-à-dire par revenir en sens contraire de la direction
primitive de la vitesse de départ si la ligne du claoc per-
çait le tapis en deçà dit point d'appui. Dans ce dernier
cas, ainsi que nous le ferons voir plus loin, il n'est
pas possible ordinairementque la conclusion ci-dessus
soit applicable, parce qu'elle suppose que la queue
ne touche plus la bille après le choc, circonstance
qui n'aura pas lieu si le coup est très-incliné et ne
frappe pas un peu bas assez près de l'équateur ho-
rizontal, ou si le joueur ne met pas une grande
adresse à retirer la queue après le coup. C'est ce que
nous développerons un peu plus loin.
   Pour avoir la position de la ligne que suit la bille
dans son état final il faut connaître l'amplitude de la
courbe décrite; c'est ce que nous allons chercher
maintenant.
   Mais ici, ce que nous trouverons dépendra, bien
entendu, des coefficiens du frottement/ et f, soit pen-
dant le choc, soit après le choc.
   Il faut remarquer que s'il y a élasticité, la quantité
de mouvement verticale ou l'intégrale des pressions
                                                     serait
sur le tapis sera plus grande que MW, sin. 0; elle
2 MW, sin. pour une
                       élasticité parfaite (t).Dans ce cas,
               f
on aurait 2 MW, sin. IL pour la quantité de mouve-
  (i) I! est bien entendu que par élasticité du tapis, on entend
seulement la propriété de rendre une vitesse verticale sans que cette
propriété tienne uniquement à l'élasticité moléculaire de la matière
du billard.
ment due au frottement; mais dans la réalité, à cause
du peu d'élasticité du plan du billard, il ne faudrait
prcndre que f MW, sin. p, ft étant peu différent de
0,20, valeur que nous avons trouvée pour le choc
contre la bande.
  Reprenons les valeurs (B) précédemment trouvées
pour les élémens U_ V, Rp Rc/t Rr en supprimant
maintenant comme inutiles les indices en bas de ces
élémens; nous aurons

   Il est facile de voir, (//g. 34) que N étant le cen-
tre de percussion supérieur de la bille, c'est-à-dire
le point situé au-dessus du centre 0 à une hauteur
égaleà' R, si l'on mène un plan horizontal par N jusqu'à
sa rencontre en P' avec la ligne du choc, la distance
P'N en projectionverticale, qui dans ce plan va du cen-
tre de percussion N à ce point P', et qui est égale à
sa projection AP sur le tapis, sera précisément la
valeur de la quantité p ci-dessus; ainsi on a
                        p= AP.
De plus, si l'on désigne par y l'angle que fait la di-
rection de cette ligne o ou AP avec la direction AB
du plan vertical du choc, en la prenant de A vers B;
on aura

En introduisant ainsi p et l'angle y dans les formules
ci-dessus, et posant pour abréger

    Pour connaître la courbe décrite parla bille, il fau-
 dra trouver d'abord la vitesse initiale AB' qui est la
 première tangente à cette courbe, c'est-à-dire la résul-
 tante de U et de V. Pour cela on portera de B en B'
 dans la direction BB'qui fait l'angle y avec AB c'est-à-
 dire dans la direction de AP, une longueur BB' a =
y^W.sin. [1-' On aura cette longueur f. W, sin. fi- en pro-
 jetant sur la verticale la longueur/^ Wi==^DB=:BS,
 ce qui donneraf W, sin. f* t=s BG on reportera cette
 projection BG de B en B', et joignant A et B', on aura
 la vitesse initiale AB' après le coup de queue.
    Connaissant déjà, par ce qui a été donné ci-dessus,
 la direction AR de la vitesse finale il suffira pour
construire la courbe décrite par la bille, de trouver
la grandeur AE de cette vitesse finales, et de se reporter
ensuite à la construction de la figure i, où l'on peut
tout conclure des vitesses AB et AE.
   La direction EB' est celle de la vitesse du point
d'appui, c'est la direction FB de la figure i; elle est
donnée par les rapports des composantes de cette vi-
tesse. Ces composantes sont,
                    U +     V– Rp.
   Elles deviennent par les valeurs ci-dessus,

  A cause du facteur commun, on voit ici que la di-
rection de la vitesse EB' au point d'appui après le
choc est encore celle qui répond à l'angle y
c'est donc celle de PA ou de B'B. Ainsi, il n'y aura
qu'à mener BE par le point B parallèlement à AP,
et l'intersection E avec AR prolongé donnera la
longueur AE pour la vitesse finale. On achèvera en-
suite la construction comme dans la figure i; c'est-à-
dire qu'on prendra le point M au milieu de B'E, puis
on tirera AM qui contiendra le point extrême L de la
courbe. Pour avoir ce point, on prendra la distance
AL de manière qu'elle soit à AM dans le rapport de
B'E a/g, ou de B'M à i fg.
  On voit d'après cette construction que le frottement
du tapis pendant le choc commence par porter l'élé-
ment AB en AB' absolument comme cela serait arrivé
pour une certaine partie de la courbe décrite par la
bille, si celle-ci fût partie après le coup de queue sans
l'influencedufrottement pendant le choc, et se fûtmue
sur le tapis avec l'influence du frottement pendant la
marche en ligne courbe. L'influence du frottement
pendant le choc ne fait donc que supprimer une pre-
mière partie de cette courbe en laissant subsister
la dernière partie et la marche finale, comme si cette
influence n'avait pas eu lieu.
   On remarquera que, dans le cas où la bille rcs-
saute, il suffira de faire toutes les mêmes construc-
tions à partir d'un nouveau point A, qui sera celui où
la bille retombe sur le tapis. Ce point sera éloigné du
premier point d'appui A à l'instant où le coup de
queue a été donné d'une distance donnée par

   Dans ces nouvelles constructions, on devra rem-
                              f
placer le coefficient fi par Ci + 2 s). En effet, le
premier choc de la queue produit alors une quan-
tité de mouvement verticale ( 1 +E)W, sin. et le
                                            p.,
choc sur le tapis à l'instant où la bille retombe,
une autre quantité de mouvement verticale e W, sin p.
   La proposition établie précédemment; savoir, que
la marche finale de la bille après le coup de queue in-
cliné ne dépend pas de l'intensité du frottement, ou,
en d'autres, termes, de l'intensité de la quantité de
mouvement verticale W sin. y. avec laquelle la bille
choque le tapis, peut s'étendre sans difficulté à ce
qui arrive après le choc contre la bande. On est
conduit ainsi à reconnaître que dans le cas du choc
de, la bille contre la bande, en faisant abstraction
de la quantité de mouvement verticale due au frot-
tement pendant le choc, nous n'avons commis au-
cune erreur sur la direction de la marche finale de
la bille. Quant à la courbe décrite par la bille, elle
reçoit une légère influence de cette quantité de mou-
vement verticale. Ainsi, dans le cas où la rotation est
directe et où u est positif et sin. c négatif, il y a un pe-
tit ressaut de la bille. Alors il faut déplacer un peu
l'origine A de la courbe dans la direction de A vers
B', et d'une distance déterminée par

En conservaut ici aux angles a. et ® la signification que
nous leur avons donne au chapitre VI. On devra
opérer en même temps sur les élémens AB' et AH'
un petit changement qui les rapproche de leurs
valeurs finales, pour tenir compte ainsi du choc
contre le tapis au moment où la bille retombe, et cela
par la construction de la figurc 34. Seulement, la vi-
tesse perdue par le frottement qui est représentée
par la distance BB', devra. être prise égale
                     f, W sin. sin. a
quantité très-facile à construire sur la figure.
   Dans le cas où la rotation est rétrograde, et où
                                                      u est
 négatifet sin a positif; alors, sans déplacer l'origine A,
  on doit faire de suite un petit changement sur AB' et
  AH' pour les rapprocher de leurs valeurs finales;
                                                              en
  employant toujours la construction de la figure 34
  pour tenir compte du petit choc vertical que produit
  contre le tapis ie frottement de la bille contre la bande
  Cela se fera en remplaçant la distance BB' de cette
  figure 34 par
                        f, W sin. t sin. a
     Pour la pratique du jeu, ces modifications peuvent
  tout-à-fait être négligées, surtout pour les vitesses ordi-
  naires qu'ont les billes au moment du choc contre la
 bande.
     Cependant il y a un coup où l'on ne doit pas né-
 gliger cette quantité de mouvement verticale; c'est
 lorsque la bille arrive à la blouse du milieu. On voit
 alors que si la rotation est directe, la bille, étant
                                                             un
 peu   soulevée par  l'effet du choc       ne retombe pas dans
 la blouse, si la vitesse à l'instant du choc été
                                                   a     un peu
 forte. Mais, au contraire, si la rotation est rétrograde,
ta bille^n'étant pas appuyée sur le tapis à l'instant où
elle est renvoyée par la bande tendra à tomber plus
promptement elle pourra entrer dans la blouse
lorsqu'elle possède une vitesse qui la ferait sauter
par dessus dans le cas précédent. Ainsi, à vitesse
égale, la bille du joueur risque toujours bien plus de
                                                              se
perdre dans la blouse du milieu quand elle y arrive
avec une rotation rétrograde.
    II se présente un cas particulier où,
                                                 pour traiter le
coup de queue incliné, il faut modifier 'les construc-
tions, ainsi que nous avons remarqué qu'on dcvait
le faire dans le choc d'une bille contre la bande.
   Ce cas est celui où le frottement du tapis contre la
bille pendant le choc est suffisant pour retenir ce
point d'appui de la bille, et le forcer à adhérer au
tapis sans glisser pendant le choc.
  On trouve facilement la quantité de mouvement
nécessaire pour retenir le point d'appui en posant les
conditions
                     U, +        o,
                     V.    R/>, = o
elles expriment que la vitesse absolue B'E au point
d'appui est nulle, c'est-à-dire qu'on a BB'™BE. Ces
équations, en vertu de la réduction des quantités
ci-dessus aux expressions (D)de la page 162, peuvent
se réduire toutes deux à

Ainsi on voit que si p, c'est-à-dire AP (fig. 34 ), est de-
venu assez petit pour que l'on ait

 le frottement f changera de valeur et n'agira plus que
 pour empêcher le glissement. Sa valeur ne sera pas
 alors supérieure à celle qui résulte de l'équation

 Ainsi dans ce cas on prendra toujours BB'=BE, et la
 bille sera de suiteàsonétatfinalaprèslecoupdequeue.
    Pour que la bille se meuve après le coup de queue
 avec les vitesses trouvées par les constructions précé-
 dentes, soit dans le cas général, soit dans le cas parti-
 çulier dont nous venons de parler, il faut qu'après le
choc il y ait séparation de la bille et de la queue, afin
que celle-ci ne continue pas de toucher la bille et ne
modifie pas les vitesses déterminées par la supposi-
tion que la bille n'a reçu qu'une quantité de mouve-
ment MW, dans la direction de ce coup de queue.
   Pour déterminer à priori la vitesse W, et pour re-
connaître si en effet il y a séparation, nous remarque-
rons que le tapis ayant une certaine compressibilité
due à l'épaisseur du drap, la bille dû descendre d'une
                                    a
très-petite quantité avant de recevoir du tapis une
très-grande force qui ne peut se produire que quand
le drap est comprimé par le choc. Or, si le coup de
queue n'est pas très-incliné, la bille aura parcouru
un certain espace avant que la compression du tapis
soit arrivée à son maximum; et pendant le temps
nécessaire pour ce déplacement, quelque petit qu'il
soit, on peut admettre que le choc de la queue est ter-
miné. En un mot, on peut traiter le choc presque si-
multané de la queue, de la bille et du tapis comme
deux chocs successifs.
   En traitant donc le choc de la queue et de la bille
comme dans le chapitre deuxième, et appelant tou-
jours W la vitesse de la queue avant le choc, W, sa
vitesse après le choc, W, celle de la bille après le choc
de la queue, M' la masse de la queue; a la distance de
la ligne du choc au centre de la bille, et 8 la fraction
de la force vive totale qui se perd par le choc de ces
 deux corps; on aura, ainsi qu'on l'a établi dans le
 deuxièmechapitre,
  L'effet du deuxième choc contre le tapis, dans la
supposition la plus générale où il ferait ressauter un
peu la bille, sera de changer la vitesse W, en une vi-
tesse dont les composantes horizontales dans le sens
du coup de queue et dans le sens perpendiculaire au-
ront les valeurs données ci-dessus savoir
           V = W, cos. p       f,
                                W, sin. p. cos. 7,
           U =fi W, sin. y. sin. y.

La troisième composante verticale que nous désigne-
rons par S sera donnée par
                     S   = W, sin. u.
                           E

t désignant la petite portion de vitesse normale rendue
par le tapis.
  Pour que la queue et la bille se séparent après le
choc, il faut qu'en prenant les vitesses de ces deux
corps dans le sens de la normale au point de choc, la
première vitesse soit plus petite que la deuxième.
  En désignant par NW, et NW, les angles que font
avec la normale les vitesses W, de la bille et W, de la
queue, on devra avoir pour la séparation après le choc,
              W, cos. (NW ) > W,' cos. (N W,' ).

  Si l'on appelle      « et les coordonnées du point de
choc dans le sens des y et des z, la étant la coor-
donnée de ce point dans le sens des x; on aura
  En remettant dans cette expression pour U V et S
leur valeur, on a

   En laissant ici   pour abréger le rapportwau leu
de la valeur en fonction de la distance a.
  Examinons d'abord le cas où az=io, ce qui donne
                             cos. y   1 et sin.y=o;
 En vertu de la valeur numérique que prend le
 deuxième membre de l'inégalité pour 6=îo,i 3, i,
 on aura

t étant négligeable,et/ pouvant être pris égal à o,ao,
on tirera de là que
                      tang. fi < 1,24.
Ainsi la bille et la queue se sépareront encore après
le choc pour une inclinaison de la queue dépassant
le demi-droit.
   Si nous considérons le cas où la queue touche la
bille au point d'arrière cas où l'on r, =sR, £=o,
                                     a
et h=:o; alors en remarquant qu'on a

Vu la petitesse du terme/ tang.    cette condition
est à peu près la même que lorsque le choc se fait
horizontalement, puisque, dans ce dernier cas, il
faut qu'on ait pour la séparation

Dans le cas du choc incliné, lorsque la queue frappe
ainsi au point d'arrière, l'angle p est limité par la dis-
tance a, puisque celle-ci ne pouvant dépasser 0,60 R,
on ne peut avoir au plus que

ce qui répond à un angle 1£ de 360.
  Si l'on frappe un peu au-dessus du point d'arrière
et un peu de côté, alors si a n'est pas trop grand,
on peut prendre l'angle IL jusque 45°. Mais et a de-
venant un peu grands, la condition de séparation n'a
plus lieu, et le coup n'est nullement assuré, puisque
la bille et la queue ne se séparant plus après le choc
les élémens du mouvement dépendraient du frotte-
ment et ne seraient plus assujettis à la construction
de la figure 34. Néanmoins, les joueurs exercés trou-
vent moyen de retirer la queue si rapidement à
l'instant du choc, qu'ils font disparaître cette cause
 d'incertitude dans les effets des coups de queue in-
 clinés et excentriques, et qu'ils opèrent des effets as-
 surés hors des limites indiquées par l'inégalité ci-
 dessus. Il leur suffit alors de ne pas dépasser pour
 la distance a la limite de 0,70 R, qui est toujours
 nécessaire pour que la queue ne glisse pas sur la
 bille au moment même du choc.
                              ERRATA
Les rectifications indiquées par des astériques doivent être faites nécessaire-
       ment avant la lecture, les autres s'appercevront d'elles-mêmes.

                  LIGNES
 pages.                              AU   LIEU DE                LISEZ
            par      par
          en haut. en bas.

    I        7e      .K".
 15
    18       6e               égale moitié.
                        8e     des   coups. coup.      du
 24                                                    l'unité à
                                 vitesse perdue          étant la fraction de
                                                        la vitesse verticalel

                                                        bille.
                               une longueur-égale. une longueur AC
                                                    égale.
    38                         par mètre              pour mètre.
    38                                              deviendrait beau-
                                 coup plus considé- couP plus considé-
                                 rables             rable.
 39                     12e

            z"

                               ad                    AD'.
   54      17e                 = Kg                    =Kq.

   59
             LIGNES

Pages.                         AU LIEU DE               LISEZ
           par      par
         en haut. eu bas.

  66

  69
                      8e

                      Ie    x' ja.
                            les coordonnées. ses coordonnées.

                      8=    (*W*) (-Vf a)*.
  71
  72                  9e    une HB sur HB.
"107       17"    point
                     équateur     de choc, cet poinl dechoc aurcet
                                                  écjuateur.
  109                 5"    ou a w = Oûa,«> =
 !33                  4'    par bille par la bille.
*!34       i3e    etDB' et B"B'.
 1 3?      6e
                    sin. a. z= R» sin. 2=
 137                  13,
 138                  16e   la direction    inci- la vitesse incidente.
                             dente.

                   2
 141       is«      conduisant à des ce sont des droites.
                             droites.
'142                  i3e   varie assez pour     varie assezpeupour;
  .45 8.
  j58 i5eeti6e     que           nous indique- DB qui représente.
                             rons plus loin com-
                             mye représentant
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/throw_follow_up_part_i_cling.pdf
title: Throw Follow Up Part I Cling
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Throw Follow-up: Part I: Cling”                                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the first article in a series dealing with throw, which is the change in object ball (OB) direction due
to sideways forces between the cue ball (CB) and OB during impact. As illustrated in NV B.86, when the
throw is due to cut angle, it is called cut-induced throw (CIT); and when it is due to sidespin, it is called spin-
induced throw (SIT). The focus of this series is CIT. In the past, I actually wrote a series of twelve
consecutive articles (August, 2006 through July, 2007) dealing with various aspects of both CIT and SIT.
Back then, the editor told me “enough was enough,” so I moved on to other topics; but now that it has been a
while since my last throw article, I thought it was time for some more. If you want to refer to any of my past
articles, they are all available at billiards.colostate.edu.

     This article deals with cling (AKA "skid" or "kick"), which refers to a "bad hit" resulting from an excessive
amount of throw, well beyond what is expected for a given shot. When the CB hits an OB with a cut angle or
non-gearing spin, there is friction between the CB and OB at the point of contact that resists the relative
motion between the balls. This is what causes throw (CIT or SIT), which is normal. A "bad hit" occurs when
the amount of friction is greater than normal (e.g., because there is a chalk mark at the point of contact). In
this case, the amount of throw (or ball hop and topspin loss in the case of a nearly straight follow shot) is
larger than the typical amount.

     People sometimes mistake a naturally large amount of throw as cling, especially if they are unaware of
how throw varies with the type of shot. (For more info, see throw effects and maximum throw in the throw
FAQ section on my website.) Again, cling is an amount of throw much greater than should be expected for a
given shot and conditions. People also sometimes think that a "bad hit" results from the CB and OB actually
clinging together for a longer time than normal. This is not the case, even though it might seem this way
based on the reaction of the balls.

    Cling can occur more often with old, beat up (e.g., from phenolic tip damage), scuffed (e.g., from
miscues), and dirty balls, where portions of the ball surfaces might create more friction than other portions
(especially when the suspect portions collect and hold chalk easily). However, cling also occurs with new,
clean, and smooth balls. The primary cause for cling is a chalk mark or smudge (or a significant amount of
chalk dust) appearing at the contact point between the CB and OB. Anytime you see chalk smudges on the
CB, you should wipe them off (or ask a referee to wipe them off if you are in the middle of a tournament
game). Definitely wipe off the CB before each break or any time you have ball in hand. We have enough
reasons to miss shots as it is without having to worry about excessive and unpredictable throw due to cling
caused by chalk smudges.

    Cling can also be created and used on purpose in certain proposition and trick shots. Examples can be
found in HSV A.142, NV B.91, and NV B.92.

     Recently, I performed a set of experiments, that are completely documented in online video NV D.16, to
characterize the effects of different surface treatments on the amount pool balls throw. It also looks at what
causes cling. The surface treatments tested include static electricity, chalk marks, dish-washing liquid,
Aramith ball cleaner, Acetone, rubbing alcohol, Silicone Spray, and sand paper. Diagram 1 shows the test
shot used in the experiment. The 1 ball is frozen to the 2 ball, and the CB is hit squarely into the 1 ball with
no sidespin to create an accurate and consistent center-to-edge ½-ball hit on the 2 ball. The frozen
combination simulates a normal, non-frozen stun shot, where throw is largest. With a straight hit along the
line of the balls, the 2-ball would not be thrown at all and would head straight up table along the “line of
centers” direction. However, with a cut angle, the 2 ball gets pushed off line at an angle as shown in the
diagram.

Billiards Digest                                                                                           July, 2014
                               Diagram 1 Test shot for throw experiments

     The first test I did was to see how throw angle varies with shot speed. Diagram 2 shows the results. The
smallest amount of throw (at the fastest speed) was about 3.5 degrees and the largest (at the slowest speed)
was about 6 degrees. Throw is less at higher speeds because the coefficient of friction (COF) between the
balls is less at faster relative surface sliding speeds. So on cut shots, if you want the OB to head in a more
“true” direction closer to the “line of centers,” use more speed. Notice in the diagram how, at the slowest
speed, throw is about the same as at the next higher speed. This is because at the slow speeds sliding
motion between the balls ceases during contact and the balls rotate together like gears before separating.
This is called the gearing limit, where throw is maximum for a given cut angle. In this case, added friction
(with slower speed) will not create more throw because there is already enough friction to create gearing.

                              Diagram 2 How throw varies with shot speed

Billiards Digest                                                                                     July, 2014
     In the next set of tests, I decided to look at how throw varies with ball surface condition. First, I wanted to
dispel a myth concerning cling. Some people have suggested that a major cause of cling is static electricity
resulting from the CB sliding across the table cloth (e.g., during a stun or draw shots). In the experiment, to
create as much static charge as possible, I held the ball with two pieces of rubber (to insulate the ball from my
fingers), and then vigorously rubbed the ball on a fold of table cloth. I verified that there was charge on the
ball by seeing if attracted small pieces of paper when held close to them. The rubbing was done before each
shot. Table 1 shows the results of the test. Static electricity alone definitely does not create cling, skid, or
kick. The throw of the charged ball was actually less; although, the difference was not significant, and could
represent experimental error. The reduced throw could have also been caused by the rubbing on the cloth,
creating a slight polishing effect on the ball. Regardless, static electricity definitely did not cause an increase
in throw, as some people have suggested.

                                   Table 1 Results of static electricity test

    Cling, skid, or kick is often caused by a chalk smudge appearing at the contact point between the CB and
OB. In the next set of tests, I applied chalk marks to each OB by striking each with a well-chalked tip. Then I
placed the balls in position with the chalk marks touching at the contact point. Table 2 shows the results of
the experiment. In this case, the used balls had less throw (4.4 degrees) than the new out-of-the-box balls
tested earlier (which threw about 5.8 degrees); although, they were different brands. A chalk smudge at the
contact point created about 50% more throw than normal for this test. The cling effect due to a chalk smudge
can be even greater at other cut angles and speeds, as we’ll see next month.

                                Table 2 Results of chalk-at-contact-point test

      Table 3 shows the throw experiment results for various surface treatments. Standard pool ball cleaners
like the Aramith cleaner reduces throw some. Car wax can reduce throw significantly. Saliva and Silicone
Spray can each practically eliminate throw. About 7° seems to be the maximum throw possible for a 30
degree cut. This probably corresponds to the gearing limit discussed earlier. Attempting to create additional
friction with sand paper and chalk did not increase the amount of throw. It appears that the squeaky-clean
surfaces dishwashing liquid and alcohol create result in the most throw. Again, online video NV D.16 shows
and describes the results of all of the experiments performed. Check it out when you get a chance.

Billiards Digest                                                                                           July, 2014
                                      Table 3 Results of surface treatment tests

      You may be asking yourself: “Why not always use a wax to reduce throw as much as possible?” If there
were no throw, shot making would be easier because you could aim every shot, regardless of angle, speed,
and spin, to hit at the ideal ghost-ball position along the "line of centers." Low friction on the CB would also
make draw shots easier since less backspin would be lost on the way to the OB. However, with a very-low-
friction wax, certain throw and spin-transfer shots would no longer be possible (see the throw FAQ page on
my website for examples). Also, conditions being so different than what people expect would require
adjustments. Also, as the wax wears off with use, the conditions could change significantly. Also, if
everybody did not use the same wax, and clean and wax the balls frequently, conditions could be very
different from one place to another, from one day to the next, and from one ball to the next.

     I hope you enjoy my throw follow-up article series. If you want to learn more about throw, lots of
information and video demonstrations can be found on the throw resources page in the FAQ section at
billiards.colostate.edu.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV B.86 –Cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT), from VEPS IV
                    NV B.91 – Frozen-throw-down-rail proposition shot, from VEPS V
normal video
                    NV B.92 – "Impossible" cut shots, from VEPS V
                    NV D.16 – Pool ball cut-induced throw and cling/skid/kick experiment

                    HSV A.142 – Vernon Elliott cross-side bank with chalk on the OB to increase throw and spin
                    transfer
high-speed video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          July, 2014
Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-
author of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice
(VEPP),” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                      July, 2014
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/throw_follow_up_part_ii_more_results.pdf
title: Throw Follow Up Part Ii More Results
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills, robotics_and_computation
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Throw Follow-up: Part II: More Results”                                    ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the second article in a follow-up series dealing with throw, which is the change in object ball (OB)
direction due to sideways forces between the cue ball (CB) and OB during impact (see NV B.86 for more info
and demonstrations). Last month, I presented the results of an experiment performed to characterize the
effects of different surface treatments on the amount pool balls throw. The experiment also looked at what
causes cling (AKA “skid” or “kick”), which is an excessive amount of throw. With last month’s tests, the
surface treatments were applied in a particular order to the same set of balls. But would the results be the
same if things were done in a different order? For example, would cleaning with alcohol alone have the same
effect as cleaning with alcohol after previously cleaning with Acetone, which is what was done last month?
This question is answered in the new experiment. Also, all of the results presented last month were for a ½-
ball hit 30° cut angle. In the experiment this month, we will see how throw and cling change with a larger cut
angle.

     Diagram 1 shows the test shot used in the experiment. The 1 ball is frozen to the 2 ball, and there is a
spare CB frozen to the 1 ball. Unlike last month, where the cut angle was 30°, here the angle is 45°. The
purpose for the spare ball at the ghost-ball position is to help ensure a consistent and square hit on the 1 ball
and minimize any effects of unintentional sidespin on the CB. It also allows easy simulation of the effects of
different conditions on the CB-to-OB contact point. The CB is hit squarely into the frozen ball with no sidespin
to create an accurate and consistent 45° cut. With a straight hit along the line of the balls, the 2-ball would
not be thrown at all and would head straight up table along the “line of centers” direction. However, with a cut
angle, the 2 ball gets pushed off line at an angle as shown in the diagram. The frozen combination simulates
a normal, non-frozen stun shot, where throw is largest.

                                Diagram 1 Test shot for throw experiments

Billiards Digest                                                                                      August, 2014
      Diagram 2 shows the results of the first test that determined how throw angle varies with shot speed for a
45° cut. As with the 30° cut last month, throw is smaller at faster speeds. In this case, the throw at slower
speeds (close to 7°) is more than twice that at faster speeds (about 3°). That’s one reason top players often
use more speed rather than less where there is a choice (and where the speed won’t decrease the effective
size of the pocket much). With faster speed, the OB goes closer to the intuitive and easy-to-visualize line-of-
centers direction. Also notice in the graph how throw appears to approach a limit at slower speeds where
friction is greatest. All of the tests from both last month and this month can be viewed in online video NV
D.16.

                               Diagram 2 How throw varies with shot speed

     The next set of tests explored how throw varies with selected ball-surface conditions. Table 1
summarizes the results, starting with unmodified used balls. The first treatment tested was rubbing alcohol, to
see the independent effects of alcohol. Remember, last month the balls were cleaned with alcohol after they
had already been cleaned with Acetone. Notice how the amount of throw increased dramatically (from 4.9° to
11°). That was the case last month also, but now we know it is due to the alcohol and not a previous
treatment. Notice how the throw decreased again (down to 3.6°) with the Aramith ball cleaner, below what is
typical with used and unclean balls (4.9°).

Billiards Digest                                                                                     August, 2014
                                  Table 1 Results of surface condition experiments

    With a 45° cut, there is potential for a much larger increase in throw than with 30° cuts because it takes
more friction force to gear the balls together during impact. Therefore, the effects of cling can be much more
noticeable at the table with larger cuts (since the resulting throw is much more than normal). In the next set of
tests (see the “chalk/chalk” row in the table), I applied chalk to both contact points of the three frozen balls to
create cling (excessive throw). The throw increased from 3.6° to 11.6°, more than a factor-of-3 increase!
This would definitely be noticeable (and even shocking) at the table if it occurred during a normal shot (which
could happen, especially with a slow stun shot, if a chalk smudge happened to appear at the ball contact
point).

     In the test just described, chalk was added to the contact point between the spare CB and the 1 ball to
see if this has any effect on the results. If you watch the online video, you will see that spare frozen CB picks
up some spin as the first OB acquires spin during collision as the two OBs attempt to gear together. To see if
this is a significant effect or not, I then repeated the tests after cleaning the chalk off the contact point
between the spare ball and first OB. I went even further by wetting the CB-OB contact point with saliva before
each shot to reduce friction even more. If you watch the video, you will see that the frozen CB picked up no
spin at all as the OBs attempted to gear during the collision. At first, I thought the amount of throw would be
very different, but as shown in the last row of the table, it didn’t change much. This sort of justifies the frozen
combo test as a simulation of a normal non-frozen stun shot, because it shows that there is no significant
effect on throw when the CB is in contact with the first OB during the collision, even if there is chalk at the
contact point.

    Much more throw is possible at larger cut angles. With the 30° cuts last month, the largest throw was
about 7°. With the 45° cuts, the largest was over 11°. At larger cut angles, it takes more friction force to gear
the balls together, so added friction can have a greater effect.

     Again, online video NV D.16 shows and describes the results of all of the experiments performed. Check
it out when you get a chance. It is a lot more interesting to actually see an effect rather than just read about it.
Even better, try some of the experiments on your own. They aren’t that difficult, and they don’t take much
time.

    Based on the results of the experiments (from both last month and this month), here is some important
advice:

          •        Keep pool balls clean.

          •        Wipe chalk marks off the cue ball when you have ball in hand, and between games.

          •        Clean chalk smudges off OBs whenever you spot any.

          •        Dirty and chalk-smudged conditions can result in excessive throw.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        August, 2014
               •   Use standard pool-ball cleaners.   Other cleaning products and waxes can create radically
                   different throw properties.

     I hope you are enjoying my throw follow-up article series. If you want to learn more about throw, lots of
information and video demonstrations can be found on the throw resources page in the FAQ section at
billiards.colostate.edu.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV B.86 –Cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT), from VEPS IV
normal video
                    NV D.16 – Pool ball cut-induced throw and cling/skid/kick experiment

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-
author of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice
(VEPP),” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      August, 2014
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/throw_follow_up_part_iii_frozen_throw.pdf
title: Throw Follow Up Part Iii Frozen Throw
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Throw Follow-up: Part III: Frozen Throw”                                   ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the third article in a follow-up series dealing with throw, which is the change in object ball (OB)
direction due to sideways forces between the cue ball (CB) and OB during impact (see NV B.86 for more info
and demonstrations). Over the last two months, I presented the results of experiments performed to
characterize the effects of different surface treatments on the amount pool balls throw (see NV D.16). The
experiments also looked at what causes cling (AKA “skid” or “kick”), which is an excessive amount of throw.
In these experiments, the OB being thrown was frozen to the simulated CB doing the throwing. This begs the
question: Do pool balls throw more when they are frozen? This article presents the results of an additional
experiment designed to answer that question.

     Diagram 1 shows the test shot used in the experiment. The 1 ball is either frozen to the 2 ball or placed
very close with a small gap, with the line of centers pointing straight up table. A small gap between the 1 and
2 balls creates a non-frozen combination shot and simulates a normal stun shot where the CB has absolutely
no top or bottom-spin at contact with the OB. Two different cut angles were tested: 30° and 45°. Two
different conditions were tested for the 1-ball-2-ball contact point: clean and with a chalk smudge (to create
cling). A spare CB is frozen to the 1 ball to help ensure a consistent and square hit on the 1 ball and to
minimize any effects of unintentional sidespin on the struck CB.

                            Diagram 1 Test shot for frozen throw experiments

    With a straight hit along the line of the balls, the 2-ball would not be thrown at all and would head straight
up table along the “line of centers” direction. However, with a cut angle, the 2 ball gets thrown off line at an
angle, as shown in the diagram. The rail ruler measurements allow the throw angle to be calculated.

   Under each set of the conditions, 10-20 shots were taken and the three shots with the most consistent
speeds were kept and averaged to give the final results.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   September, 2014
     Table 1 summarizes all of the results of the experiment. In the first column, “frz” indicates the 1 and 2
balls were frozen, “chk” indicates there was a chalk smudge on each ball at the contact point, and “gap”
indicates there was a small gap (about 1 mm) between the 1 and 2 balls. Counter to conventional wisdom,
the throw amount was actually a little larger with the non-chalked gap vs. the frozen cases. The 30° cut throw
                                              st     th
value increased from 4.5° to 5.3° (see the 1 and 5 rows), and the 45° cut throw value increased from 4.3° to
               nd      th
4.9° (see the 2 and 6 rows). Throw was actually a little smaller with the chalked gap vs. frozen cases. The
30° throw value decreased from 7° to 6.8°, and the 45° cut throw value decreased from 13.4° to 13.2°;
although, both sets of values are fairly close.

     There are many possible causes for the apparent discrepancies. It is possible that any wax or residue left
on the balls by the Aramith cleaner could have been wearing off a little during the tests, tending to increase
throw. Also, there might have been slight speed differences from one set of shots to the next, but probably
fairly small, because I carefully checked for this. Also, the cut angles with the small gap might have been
slightly different than with the frozen balls. This is difficult to control perfectly; although the gap I used was
very small, and it was consistent, so this was also probably not that large of an effect.

     Regardless, based on the experiment, it is probably safe to say that for stun shots of the same speed,
whether the balls are frozen or not probably doesn’t matter much. Now, with a normal shot, it can difficult to
create perfect stun, especially at slower speeds where throw is largest, and especially at larger distances
between the CB and OB, so it might seem like frozen balls always throw more. But this is because the frozen
ball has perfect stun during contact, as it hasn’t started sliding or developing roll yet. Again, throw is largest
with stun. Also, frozen combos might be hit softly more often, where the combination of stun and slow speed
creates the largest possible throw. Again, a normal non-frozen stun shot at the same speed as a frozen
combination will throw very close to the same amount.

                               Table 1 Results of frozen-throw experiments

    Again, online video NV D.17 shows and describes the entire experiment along with the results. Check it
out when you get a chance. It is a lot more interesting to actually see an effect rather than just read about it.
Even better, try some of the experiments on your own. They aren’t that difficult, and they don’t take much
time.

     I hope you are enjoying my throw follow-up series. If you want to learn more about throw, lots of
information and video demonstrations can be found on the throw resources page in the FAQ section at
billiards.colostate.edu.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   September, 2014
Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV B.86 –Cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT), from VEPS IV
                    NV D.16 – Pool ball cut-induced throw and cling/skid/kick experiment
normal video        NV D.17 – Does a pool and billiards frozen combination throw more than a small-gap stun shot?

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-
author of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice
(VEPP),” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    September, 2014
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/throw_follow_up_part_iv_follow_cling.pdf
title: Throw Follow Up Part Iv Follow Cling
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Throw Follow-up: Part IV: Follow Cling”                                  ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

    This is the fourth article in a follow-up series dealing with throw, which is a change in object ball (OB)
direction due to sideways forces between the cue ball (CB) and OB during a collision (see NV B.86 for more
info and demonstrations). Over the last few months, I presented the results of experiments performed to
characterize the effects of different surface treatments on the amount frozen and non-frozen pool balls throw
(see NV D.16 and NV D.17). The experiments also looked at what causes cling (AKA “skid” or “kick”), which
is an excessive amount of throw, more than what you would normally expect. The previous articles and
experiments dealt with cut shots, where there is an angle between the CB aiming line and the OB target
direction. Cling can also affect straight follow shots. That’s the topic for this month.

    Diagram 1 shows a useful principle related to straight follow shots (per the physics in TP A.16). In
general, the distance the OB travels forward CB travels forward (if it were free to move until stopping
naturally, without hitting a ball, cushion or pocket) is 7 to 8 times the distance the CB travels forward. This
number can vary quite a bit with different cloth and ball conditions, but it is a good general “rule of thumb.”
Recently, I did an experiment on my table to experimentally check the number. It’s not that difficult. Do it
yourself the next time you’re at a table. Just place the CB and OB in the same place every time, as shown in
Diagram 1. Then hit the shot over a range of speeds to send the OB over a range of distances between the
starting point and the far rail. Measure and record the CB and OB distances after each shot, either with a
tape measure or by counting diamonds (and fractions of diamonds). Then calculate the OB-distance-to-CB-
distance ratio for each set of numbers. For example, if the CB travels 2 inches and the OB travels 16 inches,
the ratio would be 8 (16 / 2). This would be a useful benchmark to know for your equipment. On my table,
the average value was about 8.5, which is a little larger than normal. In other words, my CB isn’t traveling
quite as far as typical, based on how far the OB is travelling. Since the ratio was high, I decided to do an
additional experiment. I wiped the CB with Silicone spray to simulate slicker and cleaner conditions. Then
the factor went down to about 7.5, which makes sense since a slick CB will lose less spin in the hit and have
less rolling resistance on the cloth.

                                        Diagram 1 Follow distance

Billiards Digest                                                                                   October, 2014
    The follow distance and ratio apply only when the hit between the CB and OB is “good.” If a chalk
smudge happens to appear at the CB-OB contact point during the collision, all bets are off. Cling will occur
and the CB won't follow nearly as much as you would expect with a clean hit. HSV B.46 illustrates this effect,
clearly demonstrating how the CB hops, loses a significant amount of topspin and post-impact follow, and
transfers a small amount of backspin to the OB when there is cling. Maybe this has happened to you during
game situations, where the hit sounds a bit different and the shot doesn’t quite play out as you expect. It’s
certainly happened to me.

    It turns out that there are certain situations where follow-shot cling is more likely to occur than others.
The worst-case scenario is when the fresh chalk mark from the tip hitting the CB happens to end up exactly at
the contact point with the OB. When this happens, cling is pretty much guaranteed to occur. To better
understand this, first look at Diagram 2. It shows the tip height that causes the CB to roll immediately as it
leaves the tip. This immediate-roll height is at 40% of the ball’s radius (0.4R), which is a touch below the
miscue limit (at 0.5R). An example of where you would want to hit the CB at the immediate-roll height (or
higher, which is risky) is a fast-speed follow shot (AKA a “force follow” shot). You want the CB to have full roll
when it arrives at the object ball (OB) to generate good follow action. If you were to hit lower than the 0.4R
height, the CB probably wouldn’t have full roll when it reaches the OB.

                                     Diagram 2 Immediate-roll tip height

     As shown in Diagram 3, if the immediate-roll tip height is used, there will be a certain distance (d) where
the tip contact point will arrive exactly at the CB-OB contact point, resulting in cling and poor follow. TP B.16
presents the analysis used to figure out this potentially-unfortunate distance, and the results are summarized
in Table 1. It turns out that there is more than one answer. If the distance between the balls is about 1.4
balls, the chalk smudge will take the shortest-distance path to the OB contact point, as shown in Diagram 3.
If the CB were farther away, say at a distance of 4.5 balls, the chalk mark would make an extra revolution as
the ball rolls, and still end up at the OB contact point. There is an easy method you can use at the table to
figure out these “bad” distances (without complicated math). If you have an Aramith red-measles ball, use
that; otherwise use a solid or stripe as the CB. First freeze the CB to the OB with a red dot (or the center of
the number circle) in contact with the OB. Then roll the CB straight back until the mark is approximately at the
immediate-roll tip height. To create other distances, just roll the CB back additional revolutions farther. Then
chalk up the tip and hit the ball on the mark. You should get cling a large percentage of the time, assuming
you had the mark close to the correct height and the tip hit the ball on the mark without sidespin. You can
check the chalk mark on the CB after a shot to see how close you got to hitting the mark. I tried out this
procedure at the 1.4-ball distance, being very careful, and I got cling pretty much on every attempt.

                              Diagram 3 Follow cling ball separation distance

Billiards Digest                                                                                      October, 2014
                                 Table 1 Follow cling ball separation distance results

                                                   distance between the
                                                CB and OB for follow cling
                                                inches    number of balls
                                                   3.1          1.4
                                                  10.1          4.5
                                                  17.2          7.6

     So how is all of all of this information useful? Well, if you want to prevent cling and get the amount of
follow you expect on a straight shot, it is good to know or be able to visualize the distances in Table 1. If the
CB happens to be at one of these distances from the OB, hit the CB a little lower than the immediate-roll
height shown in Diagram 2. This will cause the CB to slide a bit before developing full roll, which will delay
the spot from arriving at the OB contact point, preventing cling. If the distance between the CB and OB is
anything other than the distances in Table 1, then an immediate-roll shot is a good choice because the chalk
smudge will automatically be at some point other than the CB-OB contact point, and again the shot will be
cling-free.

     I hope you are enjoying my throw follow-up series. If you want to learn more about throw, lots of
information and video demonstrations can be found on the throw resources page in the FAQ section at
billiards.colostate.edu.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV B.86 –Cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT), from VEPS IV
                    NV D.16 – Pool ball cut-induced throw and cling/skid/kick experiment
normal video        NV D.17 – Does a pool and billiards frozen combination throw more than a small-gap stun shot?

                    HSV B.46 – CB and OB hop and spin transfer during follow shots
high-speed video

                    TP A.16 – Final ball speeds, distances, and directions for natural roll shots
technical proof     TP B.16 – CB-OB distance for follow cling

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-
author of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice
(VEPP),” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      October, 2014
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/throw_part_i_introduction.pdf
title: Throw Part I Introduction
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                                      ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Throw – Part I: introduction”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article help you locate the resources on the website. If you
have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources
from a CD-ROM. See the website for details.

     This is the first of a series of articles I plan to write concerning “throw” effects. If you don’t yet
know about “throw” and the effects of speed, cut angle, and English, you are probably missing
some shots that you might think you should make, and you are probably not able to make some
shots you might see others make. First, let’s start out with some terminology and definitions.
Throw is the change in object ball (OB) direction due to sliding friction forces between the cue
ball (CB) and OB during impact. The sliding friction force results from relative motion between
the CB and OB caused by English or cut angle. Diagram 1 illustrates spin-induced throw (SIT)
caused by English. In this case, the right English causes sliding friction during impact that
pushes the OB to the left. Left English would have the opposite effect ... it would throw the OB to
the right.

                           right
                          English                   thrown OB motion
                                                                                 throw angle
                                                              expected OB direction
                                                         ("impact line" or "line of centers")
                    sideways throwing force
                     due to spin and friction

                                Diagram 1 Spin-induced throw (SIT)

     Another source of throw is the natural sliding motion between the CB and OB created by a
cut angle. This type of throw is illustrated in Diagram 2 and is labeled cut-induced throw (CIT)
or cut-induced throw. CIT throws the OB in the direction of the CB motion. For example, in
Diagram 2, where the OB is cut to the right, the CB throws the OB to the left in the direction the
CB travels after impact. Diagrams 1 and 2 also illustrate some other important terminology. The
impact line (AKA line of centers) is the line of action going through the centers of the CB and
OB at contact. This is the direction one would normally expect the OB to travel after impact, if
there were no throw. In fact, with new and polished balls, throw can be very small and the OB will
follow the impact line very closely. The amount of throw can be described by throw angle, which
is the angle between the thrown OB direction and the expected impact-line direction.
                                                  thrown OB motion
                                                                             throw angle
                                                           expected OB direction
                    cut
                   angle                              ("impact line" or "line of centers")

                                 sideways throwing force
                                due to cut angle and friction

                                 Diagram 2 Cut-induced throw (CIT)

    When a shot has both English (Diagram 1) and a cut angle (Diagram 2), additional terms are
used to characterize the English. The term inside English is used if the English is applied on the
OB side of (i.e., “inside”) the cut. For example, in Diagram 2, the OB is being cut to the right; so
right English would be referred to as inside English. In this case, the CB is struck on the right
side of the CB, which is on the OB side of the aiming line. Left English, in this case, would be
referred to as outside English because the CB would be struck on the side of the aiming line
away from (“outside”) the OB. It turns out that with just the right amount of outside English, throw
can be eliminated completely. In this case, the English can be referred to as “gearing” outside
English because the CB "rolls" on the OB during impact instead of sliding (e.g., see HSV A.8 and
HSV A.62), as if the two balls were gears meshing together. I really like this analogy because I
am a “gear-head” mechanical engineer. With no relative sideways motion between the CB and
OB during impact, there is no sliding friction or throw. With “gearing” outside English, the OB
heads exactly in the impact-line (line-of-centers) direction after impact. We will look at the effects
of outside English more in a future article.

                    HSV A.8 – Outside English cut shot
high-speed video    HSV A.62 – Cut shot with outside English and slow speed

    Another term used in describing throw effects is cling, which refers to excessive friction
between the CB and OB during a cut shot caused by a chalk smudge, dirt, and/or roughness on
the CB and/or OB. When there is cling, the OB gets thrown much more than normal, so don’t
forget to clean (and even polish) those balls periodically. We already have enough reasons (or
excuses) to miss a shot without having to also worry about clingy balls.

     Often, throw is undesirable and can cause you to miss a shot. However, there are some
cases where throw can be your friend. Diagram 3 illustrates one such example. The obstacle
ball (the stripe) blocks the path the CB would need to take for a simple cut shot of the OB (the
solid). Instead, the CB must be aimed to miss the obstacle ball, and right English must be used
to throw the OB to the left towards the pocket (see NV 4.15). The shot must be hit softly (but with
enough English) because the amount of throw can be much larger at slower speeds. This shot is
not that difficult, and it can be invaluable in a game if you need a little extra space for a shot.
When balls are frozen (i.e., touching), throw can be a significant factor because it can be much
larger than normal. NV 7.5 and NV 7.6 show dramatic examples of both CIT and SIT as applied
to frozen ball cases.

                    NV 7.5 – Frozen ball throw
normal video
                    NV 7.6 – Frozen cue-ball throw
                 the cue ball
               narrowly misses
               the obstacle ball

                    fast
                                                    right English       thrown
                    medium
                                                 throws the object     object ball
                    slow            obstacle                              path
                                      ball         ball to the left

                                    Diagram 3 Using SIT to pocket a shot

                NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
normal video

      Diagram 4 shows an example where if you don’t know about throw (or if you don’t already
correct for it subconsciously), you’ll probably miss the shot. In this case, CIT causes the OB to be
thrown in the direction of the CB motion. This throw must be accounted for when shooting cut
shots, especially longer shots where the margin of error is smaller. You must over-cut shots a
little to compensate for the throw. In the diagram, the shot is lined up so the impact line through
the ghost-ball target and the OB points to the right of the pocket to compensate for the throw to
the left. This compensation is particularly important with longer shots that are hit softly. The
lower speed increases throw (there will be more about this in future articles) and the longer shot
distance results in larger throw distance, as illustrated in the diagram. For a given throw angle,
the throw error increases with distance.

                                               small throw at     thrown OB path
                           fast
                                               short distance
                           medium
                                                                               large throw at
                           slow
                                                                               large distance

                                        Diagram 4 Adjusting for CIT

                NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video
     Well, that’s enough for now. Over the next few months we’ll look at some of the details
concerning throw. We’ll look at the effects of cut angle, speed, and spin. This will help you build
intuition for how much to adjust for different situations at the table. A complete physics and math-
based analysis can be found in TP A.14. If you like that kind of thing, you can check out the
analysis and results online. If you don’t like math and physics, just wait for my next few articles
where I’ll present some of the results in a more understandable way with some examples. I’ll see
you guys next month.

                    TP A.14 – The effects of cut angle, speed, and spin on object ball throw
technical proof

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
            If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access
             them online at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/throw_part_ii_results.pdf
title: Throw - Part II: results
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                                                         ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Throw – Part II: results”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article help you locate the resources on the website. If you
have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources
from a CD-ROM or DVD. See the website for details.

      I had a tough time deciding how to start this month’s article. How about ...

                               − c (v sin(φ ) − Rω z )2 + ( Rω x cos(φ ) )2                                                  
                      aµ + bµ e µ                                            v cos(φ )                                       
                 
θ throw = tan −1 min                                                                   , 1 7 (v sin(φ ) − Rω z )    v cos(φ )
                    
                             (v sin(φ ) − Rω z )2 + (Rω x cos(φ ) )2                             
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                             

Isn’t it beautiful! Actually, I know that it probably isn’t very pretty to most of you, but take my word
for it ... the equation is sweet. This might be the first time an equation like this has ever appeared
in Billiards Digest, and I bet most of you are thinking: “I hope it never happens again.” Well,
before you go and write a nasty letter to the editor, please bear with me for a while.

    I know the equation probably just “looks like Greek” to you (as it should, because it has many
Greek letters in it). I also know many of you might be thinking: “What in the heck does math and
physics have to do with playing pool?” Don’t worry ... I don’t plan to go through the physics and
math derivation of the equation (although, you can find it in TP A.14 if you are interested and/or
sadistic). Instead, I just want to look at all of the marvelous results and insights the equation can
provide. Amazingly, this single equation explains practically every effect and principle related to
throw. The equation provides insight on the effects of speed, cut angle, English, and ball friction,
and the results are in agreement with numerous observations and experiments.

                     TP A.14 – The effects of cut angle, speed, and spin on object ball throw
technical proof

    This is the second of a series of articles concerning “throw.” Last month, I started with some
basic terminology and some examples of where throw can help or hurt you in game situations.
To refresh your memory, throw is the change in object ball (OB) direction due to sliding friction
forces between the cue ball (CB) and OB during impact. NV 4.15, 4.16, 7.5, and 7.6 show
various examples of both cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT). See the
video demos and last month’s article for more information.
                     NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
                     NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video
                     NV 7.5 – Frozen ball throw
                     NV 7.6 – Frozen cue-ball throw

     Diagram 1 shows an example plot that can be created with the throw equation. This
particular plot shows how the amount of throw changes with cut angle for a stun shot (i.e., sliding
CB) at various speeds (slow, medium, and fast). Diagram 2 illustrates how the terminology “cut
angle” and “throw angle” are defined. The 2-ball is the OB and the 1-ball is placed at the ghost-
ball (GB) target. Useful conclusions one can observe from Diagram 1 include:
•           for small cut angle shots (i.e., fuller hits), the amount of throw does not vary with shot
            speed, but increases with cut angle.
•           for larger cut angle shots (i.e., thinner hits), the amount of throw is significantly larger for
            slower speed shots as compared to faster speed shots.
•           the amount of throw decreases a little at large cut angles, but not by much (especially for
            slower speed shots).
•           the maximum throw occurs at close to a half-ball hit (30º cut angle).

                                              theoretical CIT

        7

        6
                                                      B

        5

        4                                                                                       slow
throw

                                                                                                medium
        3                                                                                       fast

        2

                             A
        1

        0
             0          10          20           30          40          50          60
                                             cut angle

                 Diagram 1 Predicted (theoretical) stun shot cut-induced throw (CIT)
                         throw          thrown 2-ball
                         angle            direction

              2
  x
                                                                          2 1

                                            d
                                                                                         cut
                        impact line                                                     angle
                    (line of centers)

                  Diagram 2 Cut-induced throw (CIT) terminology and experiment

    Many more plots like Diagram 1, which apply to various types of shots, can be found in TP
A.14. Here’s a summary of some of the other useful conclusions that can be drawn from the other
plots:
      •   Both CIT and SIT are larger at slower speeds.
      •   CIT is larger for stun shots.
      •   SIT is larger, and most sensitive to sidespin, with stun shots.
      •   Inside English increases CIT, especially at small cut angles.
      •   Outside English creates maximum SIT at small cut angles.
      •   "Gearing" outside English results in absolutely no throw. (I’ll look at this in more detail in
          a future article).
      •   both follow and draw reduce throw, and they do so by the same amount (I’ll look at this in
          detail much more next month. Bob Jewett also looked at this effect in his May ’06
          article.)
      •   “cling” resulting from chalk smudges on the CB or OB can result in significantly higher
          friction, which can increase throw dramatically.

Over the next few months, we will look at some of these conclusions in detail and look at some
examples where the knowledge can be applied at the table. Diagram 3 illustrates examples of
how you interpret the numbers in the plots. The two shots shown correspond to the points
labeled “A” and “B” in Diagram 1. For shot “A,” the cut angle is 10º (about a 7/8-ball-hit per TP
A.23). At any speed (slow, medium, or fast), the amount of throw is the same (about 1.5º) for this
cut angle. For shot “B,” where the cut angle is about 35º (about a 1/2-ball-hit per TP A.23) and
the shot speed is slow (the red curve), the amount of throw is the largest possible (almost 6º).
The exact throw values will vary for different balls under different conditions (e.g., new, clean, and
polished balls don’t throw as much as typical used and dirty pool hall and bar balls), but the
trends exhibited by the curves and the conclusions listed above will still apply. Remember, the
plot in Diagram 1 applies only for a stun shot. That’s why slight bottom spin is shown for shot “B”
in Diagram 3. At the slow speed, the bottom spin wears off and becomes stun at OB impact
(e.g., see HSV 3.1).
                                                              fast

                                           shot "B"           medium
                                                              slow

                           5.8º                                            2
                          maximum
                           throw                                                             35º

                                                              any
                                           shot "A"          speed
                                                              stun
                   1.5º
                                                                                              10º
                                                                           1

                                  Diagram 3 Example shots from Diagram 1

                     TP A.23 – Ball-hit fraction vs. cut angle
technical proof

                     HSV 3.1 – Stop-shot showing loss of bottom spin over distance
high-speed video

     Diagram 2 shows the setup for an experiment that can be used to experimentally verify the
results of the theoretical analysis (Diagram 1). The 2-ball is the OB, and it is positioned on the
foot spot. The 2-ball will get thrown different amounts for different cut angles and speeds. The 1-
ball, which is frozen to the 2-ball, serves several purposes in the experiment. It
      •      ensures an accurate impact line.
      •      makes it easy to aim; because for all cut angles, the CB is aimed at the center of the 1-
             ball.
      •      minimizes the effects of any unintentional English on the CB since very little can transfer
             through two balls.
      •      helps ensure a stun shot (i.e., the 1-ball will not have vertical-plane spin during impact).
             Even if the CB has a little unintentional draw or follow, very little will transfer to the 1-ball.

     Diagram 4 shows the results of the experiment I performed. For each cut angle (13 total),
and for each speed (3 total), I took three attempts. If I thought my aim, stroke, or speed was off
for any attempt, I would redo it. The data points in the plot represent the average of the three
attempts for each shot. If you want to perform the experiment yourself (which I highly
recommend ... it is very good practice and helps builds throw intuition), I have a couple of files
you can print from my website to help. They are under “templates” in the “Instructor and Student
Resources” section. The first is a large graphic ruler you can tape to the head rail (adjacent to
the cushion edge) to accurately measure the amount of throw (“x” in Diagram 2). The second is
a GB and cut-angle graphic you can tape down on the table to help you aim along the different
cut angle lines. You can cut or punch holes in the template to help position the balls accurately
for each attempt. It also helps to “tap” the ball locations into place by striking down with an extra
ball to create small dents in the cloth. This helps ensure accurate and repeatable ball
placements. I used a digital video camera above the end rail so I could accurately measure the
rail distance “x” for each shot (with later slow-motion playback), but a friend with a good eye and
clipboard should be acceptable. (Unfortunately, I don’t have many friends willing or patient
enough to share my enthusiasm.) I think it is best if the shooter not see or hear the results as the
attempts are being made; otherwise, the shooter might start subconsciously trying to compensate
or adjust (i.e., cheat). Because the camera was looking at the rail for me, I didn’t have to.
Instead, I was able to concentrate on my aim, stroke, and shot speed.

                                          experimental CIT data

           7.0

           6.0

           5.0

           4.0                                                                           slow
   throw

                                                                                         medium
           3.0                                                                           fast

           2.0

           1.0

           0.0
                 0         10        20         30       40        50          60
                                             cut angle

                     Diagram 4 Example experimental data for cut-induced throw (CIT)

     If you want to calculate throw angles, you need to also measure distance “d” between the foot
spot and the head rail (see Diagram 2). The throw angle can be calculated using a scientific
calculator, a spreadsheet program (e.g., Excel), or even Google (www.google.com) with the
following equation: tan-1(x/d). For example, if you measure a rail throw distance (x) of 6 inches
and the table distance (d) is 65 inches, the throw angle would be tan-1(6/65) = 5.3º. In Google,
you just need to type “ATAN (6/65) =” in the search box and the answer magically appears. I
learned this trick from Bob Jewett. Isn’t Google amazing?

      Bob Jewett has also performed the throw experiment described above (see his June, 1995
article). I didn’t perform the experiment because I don’t trust Bob, I just wanted to experience the
results myself. Actually, Bob’s plots (see www.sfbilliards.com/Misc/throw.gif) look much better
(smoother) than mine, but our results match up very closely. Isn’t it nice when independently
performed experiments and theory can all happily agree? I was very pleased (and honestly, a
little surprised) when I saw how well the experimental results and theory matched up. Science
actually does work sometimes.
    Well, that’s enough for now. Next month, we’ll take a closer look at the effects of follow,
draw, cut angle, and speed on the amount of throw. I hope this series of articles will help you
improve your understanding and intuition of throw effects. Although nothing beats tons of
practice, knowledge can sometimes be helpful in your game. I hope you agree.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access
          them online at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/throw_part_iii_follow_and_draw_effects.pdf
title: Throw - Part III: follow and draw effects
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                                           ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Throw – Part III: follow and draw effects”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article help you locate the resources on the website. If you
have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources
from a CD-ROM. See the website for details.

     This is the third of a series of articles I plan to write concerning “throw” effects. Two months
ago, I started with some basic terminology and some examples of where throw can help you or
hurt you in game situations. Last month, we looked at the effects of cut angle and speed. To
refresh your memory, throw is change in the object ball direction due to sliding friction forces
between the cue ball (CB) and object ball (OB) during impact. NV 4.15, 4.16, 7.5, and 7.6 show
examples of both cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT). See the video
demos and the previous articles for more information.
                      NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
                      NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video
                      NV 7.5 – Frozen ball throw
                      NV 7.6 – Frozen cue-ball throw

     Last month, we saw that:
              For small cut angle shots (i.e., fuller hits), the amount of throw does not vary with shot
               speed, but increases with cut angle.
              For larger cut angle shots (i.e., thinner hits), the amount of throw is significantly larger for
               slower speed shots as compared to faster speed shots.
              The amount of throw decreases some with larger cut angles.
              Maximum throw occurs at close to a half-ball hit (30º cut angle).

    In this article, we will look at the effect of draw and follow on throw. Diagram 1 shows what
the theory (TP A.14) predicts about the comparison of draw, follow, and stun shots. Diagram 2
shows two example shots from the graph to help you interpret the results. Shot “A” is a 30º cut
angle (half-ball hit) stun shot, and shot “B” is the same cut with draw or follow. For shot “A,” the
amount of throw is abut 4.1º; and for shot “B”, the throw is about 0.9º. The following trends are
clear from the graph (Diagram 1):
              Throw is large for a stun shot.
              Both follow and draw reduce throw (as compared to stun), and they do so by the same
               amount.
              The largest discrepancy between throw values for stun and follow/draw shots occurs
               close to a half-ball hit (30º cut angle).
              The difference between the throw of stun and follow/draw shots is not as great at larger
               cut angles.
                        5

                                                       A
                        4
throw angle (degrees)

                                                                                             stun
                        3
                                                           less
                                                       difference
                                                        at larger
                                                       cut angle
                        2
                                                                                             follow/
                                                                                              draw

                        1
                                                       B

                        0
                             0        15          30              45                    60             75         90
                                                           cut angle (degrees)

                        Diagram 1 Throw angle vs. cut angle for stun. follow, and draw shots

                                                                       fast

                                                shot "A"               medium   stun
                                                                       slow

                              4.1º
                                                                                        2

                            throw                                                                           30º
                            angle               draw                      follow
                                                       fast                      fast
                                     shot "B"          medium    or              medium
                                                       slow                      slow
                            0.9º
                                                                                        1

                                                                                                            30º

                                     Diagram 2 Example shots from Diagram 1
                  TP A.14 – The effects of cut angle, speed, and spin on object ball throw
technical proof

     To attempt to verify some of the conclusions and trends of the theoretical analysis, I decided
to use and extend on an experiment proposed by Bob Jewett in his May ’06 article. The setup for
the extended experiment is shown in Diagram 3. There is a 1/4” gap between the CB and 1-ball,
and the line through their centers is along the center of the table. The gap allows you to get a
clean hit of the CB without a push or double hit. The idea of the experiment is to try stun, follow,
and draw shots at each of the two cut angles to see how the amount of throw differs among the
shot types. If you try this experiment yourself (which I highly recommend, even if you only try a
few attempts of each type of shot), you should place adhesive hole-reinforcement labels (“little
white donuts”) for the CB and 1-ball and tap the balls into place to help ensure accurate
placement for each shot attempt. Also, it is best if you can use a camera (or a trusty friend) to
record where the 1-ball hits the head rail, so you can concentrate on your aim and stroke. The
“rail ruler” under “templates” in the “Instructor and Student Resources” section of my website can
help you get accurate results. The exact angles of the two shots aren’t as important as making
sure your aim is consistent for every attempt. You can place balls or pieces of chalk along the
side rail to serve as aim points. I used the “cut angle template” (also on the website) to create
30º and 45º aiming lines. Although, because of the gap between the balls, the actual cut angles
are slightly more (especially with the larger cut angle). But again, we don’t care so much about
exact cut or throw amounts. We care more about seeing the difference between stun and
follow/draw, everything else remaining the same.

                                       aim for medium               aim for larger
                                          cut angle                   cut angle

 throw                1-ball path
distance
measured
                                                                                 1
 along
 the rail

                             impact line                                       1/4"
                         (line of centers)                                     gap

       Diagram 3 Experiment to measure differences among stun, draw, and follow shots

    Table 1 summarizes the results from my run of the experiment. The throw distance numbers
for each “set” represent an average of four good attempts. For each set, I shot the stun, draw,
and follow shots for each cut angle. If the speed of an attempt was off, or if I felt my stroke or aim
was not good, I would redo the attempt. So Table 1 represents lots of shot attempts. Diagram 3
shows the amount of OB (1-ball) travel I strived for on each shot attempt to ensure consistent
speed. The travel distance is less for the larger cut angle because the OB picks up less speed
from the CB for the same stroke speed. If the final 1-ball location were off by more than about a
foot, I would redo the attempt. As we saw last month, shot speed can have a dramatic effect on
the amount of throw. If you try this experiment, you must be very careful with cue tip placement.
Any slight unintentional and inconsistent side English can corrupt your results. Also, you should
be consistent with the amount of draw or follow you apply. I used close to maximum tip offset
(with the cue tip center aimed at the red circle on an Elephant Practice Ball) on every shot.

     My results for the medium cut shot agree with the theory and with the conclusions Bob
presented in his article. The amounts of throw for the follow and draw shots were practically
identical and much less than that observed for the stun shot. The larger cut angle shot helped
verify the other trend in Diagram 1 concerning how the throw amounts change at larger cut
angles. The data agrees with the trend in the graph: the difference between the throw for stun
vs. follow/draw shots was not as large at the larger cut angle. The results were also very
repeatable for all shots (i.e., the numbers did not change much from one set of shots to another).

    Again, the point of this experiment is not to measure exact throw angles (as with the
experiments I described last month), but to see the difference between stun, follow, and draw
shots. Because of the gap between the balls, the actual throw values aren’t so useful because
the CB is being cut to the left some, and by different amounts for each cut angle. However, the
comparison between stun and follow/draw is still clear and supports the theoretical results.

                   Tabel 1 Throw distances (inches) for stun, draw, and follow shots

                              medium cut angle                          larger cut angle
      set
                       stun         draw         follow         stun          draw         follow

          1             3.9          0.9           0.8           1.7           0.6          0.4

          2             3.7          0.7           0.9           1.2           0.6          0.6

          3             3.4          0.7           0.8           1.4           0.5          0.5

          4             4.0          0.7           0.7           1.5           0.5          0.5

          5             4.5          0.7           0.7           1.8           0.4          0.5

    I hope you are enjoying and learning from my series of articles dealing with throw. If you
have been missing some slow cut shots (especially with stun), and have been more accurate with
faster follow and draw cut shots, throw effects might be part of the explanation. Next month, we’ll
look at spin-induced throw (SIT) in detail.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
             If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access
              them online at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/throw_part_iv_spin_induced_throw.pdf
title: Throw - Part IV: spin-induced throw
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David G. Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                                  ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Throw – Part IV: spin-induced throw”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article help you locate the resources on the website. If you
have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources
from a CD-ROM. See the website for details.

     This is the fourth of a series of articles concerning “throw” effects. So far, I’ve looked at basic
terminology, examples of where throw can help you or hurt you in game situations, the effects of
cut angle and speed, and the effects of follow and draw. All of my past articles are available on
my website (billiards.colostate.edu) if you want to refer back to them. To refresh your memory,
throw is change in the object ball direction due to sliding friction forces between the cue ball (CB)
and object ball (OB) during impact. NV 4.15, 4.16, 7.5, and 7.6 show examples of both cut-
induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT). See the video demos and the previous
articles for more information.
                      NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
                      NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video
                      NV 7.5 – Frozen ball throw
                      NV 7.6 – Frozen cue-ball throw

     Here is a summary of the most important conclusions from previous articles:
              For small cut angle shots (i.e., fuller hits), the amount of CIT does not vary with shot
               speed, but increases with cut angle.
              For larger cut angle shots (i.e., thinner hits), the amount of CIT is significantly larger for
               slower speed shots as compared to faster speed shots.
              The amount of CIT decreases some with larger cut angles.
              Maximum CIT occurs at close to a half-ball hit (30º cut angle).
              CIT is largest for a stun shot.
              Both follow and draw reduce CIT (as compared to stun), and they do so by the same
               amount.

     This month, we will look at spin-induced throw (SIT) resulting from English. As illustrated in
Diagram 1, English creates a sideways friction force on the object ball that throws the object ball
off the impact line (AKA “line of centers”). As shown in Diagram 2, left English throws the object
ball to the right and right English throws the object ball to the left.
                                                              thrown object
                                                               ball motion

                                                                    impact line

                               sideways throwing force
                                due to sidespin friction

                                Diagram 1 Spin-induced throw (SIT)

                      fast
                      medium
                      slow

                   a) left English throws the object ball to the right
                                                                                   thrown
                                                                                  object ball
                                                                                     path
                      fast
                      medium
                      slow

                   b) right English throws the object ball to the left

                                      Diagram 2 SIT directions

     Diagram 3 shows a graph from the throw analysis in TP A.14 showing how SIT varies with
English and vertical plane spin (i.e., the amount of draw or follow) for a straight-on (zero cut
angle) shot as shown in Diagram 1. The graph is a plot of the amount of throw (on the vertical
axis) vs. the amount of English (on the horizontal axis). The amount of English is specified as the
percentage of maximum recommended English (as described in my July ’06 article dealing with
“tips of English”). Right English (the right side of the graph) is reported as a positive number and
designated with “R,” and left English (the left side of the graph) is negative and is designated with
“L.” Throw to the left (from right English) is labeled negative (the bottom half of the graph), and
throw to the right (from left English) is labeled positive (the top half of the graph). The red curve
shows how SIT varies with English for a stun shot (0% draw or follow). The green curve shows
the effect for a 50% draw or follow shot (i.e., with half the amount of spin as a typical maximum
draw or follow shot). The blue curve shows the effect for a maximum spin (100%) draw or follow
shot.     See my July ’06 article for more information about maximum recommended
draw/follow/English. As we saw last month, the effects of follow and draw on the amount of throw
is the same. The experimental results presented last month proved this for CIT and the detailed
math and physics (for the nerds out there) can be found in TP A.24. The conclusions also apply
to SIT.
                        4

                        3

                        2

                                        C
throw angle (degrees)

                        1
                                                 100%
                                             follow/draw
                        0                        (F/D)

                        -1
                                                                         B             50%
                                                                                       F/D
                        -2

                        -3
                                                                                               stun
                                                                                             (0% F/D)
                                                                                 A
                        -4
                         -100%      -75%        -50%        -25%     0        25%        50%       75%      100%
                                   (3/4 L)     (1/2 L)     (1/4 L)           (1/4 R)    (1/2 R)   (3/4 R)
                                                         amount of English (% of max)

                                       Diagram 3 SIT vs. vertical plane spin and English

                                 TP A.14 – The effects of cut angle, speed, and spin on object ball throw
technical proof                  TP A.24 – The effects of follow and draw on throw

    To help interpret the results in Diagram 3, Diagram 4 illustrates the data for the three
example points labeled “A,” “B,” and “C.” Shot “A” is a stun shot with about 35% right English
(about 1/2 “tip”), which results in about 3.8º of SIT to the left. Shot “B” is a half spin (50%) follow
or draw shot with about 15% of right English (about 1/4 “tip”), which results in about 1.2º SIT to
the left. Shot “C” is a maximum spin (100%) follow or draw shot, with about 75% left English
(about 1 “tip”), and it results in only about 1º of throw to the right.
                                                     fast
                                                                 stun
                                shot "A"             medium
                                                              35% English
                                                     slow
                                                                         2
              3.8º

                                       fast                    fast
                                                                        50% draw or follow
                     shot "B"          medium   or             medium
                                                                          15% English
                                       slow                    slow
              1.2º                                                       2

                                       fast                    fast
                                                                        100% draw or follow
                     shot "C"          medium   or             medium
                                                                           75% English
                                       slow                    slow
                                                                         2
               1º

                          Diagram 4 Example shots from Diagram 3

    Here are some conclusions that can be drawn from the graph in Diagram 3:
       SIT is maximum for stun shots.
       Follow and draw both reduce SIT, and they do so by the same amount.
       More English gives you more SIT only up to a point (about 35% English for a stun shot).
        Additional English (beyond 35% for stun) actually reduces the amount of SIT (i.e., more
        English doesn’t always give you more throw).
       The amount of throw can increase significantly as a small amount of English is added,
        especially for a stun shot.

    So how can this information be useful in your game? Here are a few examples:

         1. When not using English, make sure you are hitting the center of that cue ball;
            otherwise, SIT might make you miss your shot. This is especially important for slow
            stun shots.

         2. If you need to throw an object ball a lot (e.g., as with the shot in NV 4.15), use a soft
            stun shot with about 35% English (about 1/2 tip). This is one of those cases where
            more (in this case, English) is not better.

         3. If stun is not required for position on the next shot, use draw or follow to minimize
            the amount of throw. Also, if you are hitting a follow or draw shot with English,
            remember that you don’t need to correct as much for throw (because it is smaller
            than that for a stun shot).

    I hope you are enjoying and learning from my series of articles dealing with throw. Over the
next few months we’ll look at the combination of CIT and SIT, the effects of outside English, and
various approaches for dealing with throw in your game.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave
PS:
         If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access
          them online at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/throw_part_ix_spin_transfer_follow_up.pdf
title: Throw - Part IX: spin transfer follow-up
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David G. Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                            ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Throw – Part IX: spin transfer follow-up”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article help you locate the resources on the website. If you
have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources
from a CD-ROM. See the website for details.

     This is the ninth article in my series dealing with “throw” effects. I hope that you’re not
thinking: “Enough, already!” I promise that I’m almost done with throw, and soon I’ll move on to
other topics. Please bear with me a little longer. So far, I’ve looked at basic terminology,
examples of where throw can help you or hurt you in game situations, the effects of cut angle and
speed, the effects of follow and draw, spin-induced throw, the difference between inside and
outside English, the combination of spin- and cut-induced throw effects, and spin transfer. If you
want to refer back to any of my past articles, they are all available on my website
(billiards.colostate.edu). To refresh your memory, throw is change in the object ball direction
due to sideways forces between the cue ball (CB) and object ball (OB) during impact. NV 4.15,
4.16, 7.5, and 7.6 show examples of both cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw
(SIT). See the video demos and previous articles for more information.
                NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
                NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video
                NV 7.5 – Frozen ball throw
                NV 7.6 – Frozen cue-ball throw

     Last month, I discussed, illustrated, and demonstrated spin transfer and how it is related to
throw. You can’t have one without the other. Spin transfer refers to spin the CB imparts to the
OB during collision (see last month’s article for more info). Recently, there was heated debate on
this topic in the Billiards Digest CCB online discussion forum. There are several fairly respected
instructors and authors out there who still don’t think spin transfer exists or is significant. In this
article, I will show and explain an example that I think will explain the various perspectives
accurately.

     Diagram 1 illustrates a shot that some people claim proves that throw and spin transfer don’t
exist. The CB is hit into the OB with English such that the CB stops, spinning in place. The OB
heads straight up table and rebounds off the head cushion straight back with no rebound angle.
First of all, this shot, even if it can be executed as shown, doesn’t prove that throw doesn’t exist.
If there is any squirt (described below), the cue ball will hit the OB with a slight cut angle; and
throw can cancel the squirt effect, resulting in the OB heading straight up-table (see Diagram 2
and the discussion below). Now, if there were no rebound angle off the head cushion, this would
seem to indicate that no spin was transferred to the OB. Well, a better way to put it might be:
very little spin was transferred to the OB, and what little spin there was mostly wore off as the OB
traveled up table. The notes in Diagram 1 explain other reasons why the throw and spin transfer
might be very small in this example. If the balls are new, clean, and polished, there will be a lot
less throw and spin transfer than normal (see the plots and conclusions at the end of TP A.27).
Also, if 100% English is used, there will be less throw and spin transfer than if less English were
used (see my November ’06 article). Also, if fast speed is used, the throw and spin transfer will
be much less than with slower speeds (see my December ’06 article). Also, if follow or draw were
used with the English, the amount of throw and spin transfer would be even less (see my October
’06 article). Finally, if the cushion cloth is slick and dry, spin won’t “take” as much, so the rebound
angle won’t be affected as much by what little transferred spin remains.

                      the cloth                                              100% English
                       is slick                 there appears to be
                       and dry                    negligible throw                   fast
                                                                                     medium
                                                                                     slow

                         there is
                   negligible rebound           the balls are
                   angle (i.e., the OB         new, clean, and          the CB stops
                  heads straight back)            polished            and spins in place

              Diagram 1 Example shot where throw and spin transfer are not noticeable

                     TP A.27 – Spin transfer
technical proof

     Diagram 2 shows the same shot as in Diagram 1, but this time with less speed and spin, and
now assuming more-typical playing conditions. By typical playing conditions, I mostly mean that
the balls are not brand new, perfectly clean, and polished smooth (i.e., what you would find in
typical home game rooms, pool halls, and bars). As shown in the diagram, the CB squirts to the
left a little because of the right English (see NV 4.13 and NV A.17). Even with a low-squirt (AKA
low CB deflection) cue, squirt is still a factor. Therefore, the cue ball hits the OB with a slight cut
angle to the right. But the right English throws the OB to the left; so the throw can cancel the
squirt effect, and the OB can still head straight up-table. Because of the cut angle, you might
think the CB should drift left a little after impact. However, because the CB is throwing the OB to
the left, the OB exerts an equal and opposite force back on the CB (to the right). This cancels out
the cut angle effect, so the CB stops in place spinning. I demonstrate and describe how this
works with the series of shots in NV A.21. As we saw last month, if there is throw, there must be
spin transfer. And sidespin is very persistent, meaning it doesn’t wear off very much as the OB
heads up-table. The spin causes the OB to bounce off the head cushion with a rebound angle.
To get maximum throw and spin transfer on this shot, you want to use a slower speed and about
50% English (see my December ’06 article). Slight draw is shown in the diagram to achieve stun
at OB impact to also help create maximum effect (see my November ’06 article).
                     typical
                                                          the CB squirts
                    playing                                                    50% English
                                                        to the left slightly
                   conditions                                                   stun shot
                                                                                     fast
                            left spin               CB right                         medium
                          transferred               English                          slow

                             to OB

                                                                                   impact
                     change in                 throw                                 line
                   rebound angle               angle          the CB stops
                     due to spin                            and spins in place

                     Diagram 2 Same example with throw and spin transfer evident

                     NV 4.13 – Squirt due to high speed English
                     NV A.17 - English deflection (squirt) vs. speed
normal video         NV A.21 – Bank shot using throw and spin transfer

     If you want to try out this shot yourself (which I highly recommend for all shots in all articles
and books you read), be sure to use a striped ball for the OB to help you see the spin transfer
effect. If you line up the stripe in the direction of the shot, and you hit the OB straight up-table,
and there is no spin transfer, the stripe should stay aligned straight as the ball rolls. If, on the
other hand, the stripe wobbles, then that is evidence that sidespin has transferred to the OB. If
you are still skeptical of the significance of throw and spin transfer, please look back at NV A.21.
I think the bank example demonstrated and explained in that clip provides pretty convincing
evidence of the effects. If that’s not proof enough, HSV A.66 provides a visual high-speed video
demonstration; and for the physics nerds out there, TP A.27 provides a physics-based
mathematical proof.

                     HSV A.66 – Straight-on shot with English and slow speed
high-speed video

     I think the explanations and examples in this article help settle some of the debate that has
appeared on the online forum lately. If it doesn’t, I give up ... I gave it my best try. I hope you are
enjoying and learning from my series of articles dealing with throw. Next month, I’ll look at
examples of outside and inside English and how an understanding of throw effects can help you
at the table.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS: I want to thank user “Jal” on the Billiards Digest CCB online forum. He helped my spot and
fix several errors in my original spin transfer analysis (TP A.27). Jal, please continue to help keep
me honest. I also want to thank “cushioncrawler” for helping to spur some interesting discussion
and debate.
PS: I know other authors and I tend to use a lot of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, impact
line, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever come across
a word you don’t fully understand, please refer to the glossary in my book. For convenience, I
have a copy of it posted online in the “Instructor and Student Resources” section of my website.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/throw_part_v_sit_speed_effects.pdf
title: Throw - Part V: SIT speed effects
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David G. Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                                   ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Throw – Part V: SIT speed effects”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article help you locate the resources on the website. If you
have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources
from a CD-ROM. See the website for details.

    This is the fifth of a series of articles concerning “throw” effects. So far, I’ve looked at basic
terminology, examples of where throw can help you or hurt you in game situations, the effects of
cut angle and speed, the effects of follow and draw, and the basics of spin-induced throw. All of
my past articles are available on my website (billiards.colostate.edu) if you want to refer back to
them. To refresh your memory, throw is change in the object ball direction due to sideways
forces between the cue ball (CB) and object ball (OB) during impact. NV 4.15, 4.16, 7.5, and 7.6
show examples of both cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT). See the video
demos and the previous articles for more information.
                      NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
                      NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video
                      NV 7.5 – Frozen ball throw
                      NV 7.6 – Frozen cue-ball throw

   Last month, I introduced the basics of SIT.                Here is a summary of the most important
conclusions from last month:
              Left English throws the object ball to the right and right English throws to the left.
              SIT is maximum for a stun shot.
              Follow and draw both reduce SIT, and they do so by the same amount.
              More English gives you more SIT only up to a point. Additional English actually reduces
               the amount of SIT (i.e., more English doesn’t always give you more throw).
              The amount of throw can increase significantly when a small amount of English is added,
               especially for a stun shot.

This month, we will look at the effect of shot speed on SIT.

     Diagram 1 shows a graph from the throw analysis in TP A.14 showing how spin-induced
throw varies with speed for straight-on (0-degree cut angle) stun shots with different amounts of
English. The graph is a plot of the amount of throw (on the vertical axis) vs. the amount of
English (on the horizontal axis). The three curves show SIT for three different speeds (slow,
medium, and fast). The amount of English is specified as the percentage of maximum
recommended English (as described in my July ’06 article dealing with “tips of English”). Right
English (the right side of the graph) is reported as a positive number and designated with “R,” and
left English (the left side of the graph) is negative and is designated with “L.” Throw to the left
(from right English) is labeled negative (the bottom half of the graph), and throw to the right (from
left English) is labeled positive (the top half of the graph).
                        4

                        3

                        2
throw angle (degrees)

                        1
                             C

                        0
                                                                                             fast

                        -1

                                                                             B                          medium
                        -2

                                                                                              slow
                        -3
                                                                                       A
                        -4
                         -100%      -75%       -50%       -25%       0        25%        50%         75%      100%
                                   (3/4 L)    (1/2 L)    (1/4 L)             (1/4 R)    (1/2 R)     (3/4 R)
                                                        amount of English (% of max)

                                              Diagram 1 SIT vs. amount of English

                                 TP A.14 – The effects of cut angle, speed, and spin on object ball throw
technical proof

    To help interpret the results in Diagram 1, Diagram 2 illustrates the data for the three
example points labeled “A,” “B,” and “C.” Shot “A” is a slow shot with about 50% right English,
which results in about 3.4º of SIT to the left. Shot “B” is a 25% right English shot, which results in
about 1.8º SIT to the left at any speed. Shot “C” is a 100% (maximum) left English shot that
results in less than 0.5º of throw to the right.
                                                 fast

                               shot "A"          medium
                                                 slow
                                                                   1
              3.4º

                                                  any
                               shot "B"          speed
              1.8º                                                 2

                                                  fast
                               shot "C"          medium
                                                 slow
                                                                   3
              0.4º

                          Diagram 2 Example shots from Diagram 1

    Here are some conclusions that can be drawn from the graph in Diagram 1 and the examples
in Diagram 2:
       SIT is independent of speed (i.e., the throw is the same at all speeds) for small amounts
        of English.
       SIT is largest for a slow stun shot with about 50% of maximum English.
       More English (e.g., greater than 50% for a slow stun shot, and greater than 25% for a fast
        stun shot) doesn’t always create more throw.

Based on this information, I want to clear up a slight error in my commentary for the example shot
shown in NV 4.15. In the video, I recommend using maximum English. Well, that’s not the best
advice if you want to achieve the maximum amount of throw. Any amount of English beyond 50%
actually reduces the amount of throw. I’ve wanted to correct that video for a long time, but
priorities don’t always leave time for such activities.

   So how can the information in this article be useful in your game? Here are a couple of
examples:

         1. When you don’t intend to use English, make sure you are hitting the center of that
            cue ball; otherwise, SIT caused by unintentional English might make you miss your
            shot.

         2. If you need to throw an object ball a lot (e.g., as with the shot in NV 4.15), use a soft
            stun shot with about 50% English. This is one of those cases where more (in this
            case, English) is not better.

    I hope you are enjoying and learning from my series of articles dealing with throw. Over the
next few months, we’ll look at the combination of CIT and SIT, outside English, and various
approaches for dealing with throw and squirt in your game.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave
PS:
         If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access
          them online at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/throw_part_vi_inside_outside_english.pdf
title: Throw - Part VI: inside/outside English
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David G. Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Throw – Part VI: inside/outside English”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article help you locate the resources on the website. If you
have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources
from a CD-ROM. See the website for details.

    This is the sixth of a series of articles concerning “throw” effects. So far, I’ve looked at basic
terminology, examples of where throw can help you or hurt you in game situations, the effects of
cut angle and speed, the effects of follow and draw, and the basics of spin-induced throw. All of
my past articles are available on my website (billiards.colostate.edu) if you want to refer back to
them. To refresh your memory, throw is change in the object ball direction due to sideways
forces between the cue ball (CB) and object ball (OB) during impact. NV 4.15, 4.16, 7.5, and
7.6 show examples of both cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT). See the
video demos and the previous articles for more information.
                NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
                NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video
                NV 7.5 – Frozen ball throw
                NV 7.6 – Frozen cue-ball throw

    In previous months, I’ve looked separately at the effects of CIT for cut shots with no English
and SIT with no cut angle. So you are probably asking yourself (I hope you are, anyway), “What
about when you have a cut shot with English, and how will outside English affect a shot differently
from inside English?” Well, that’s the topic of this article. First, let’s look at some terminology.

     Diagram 1 illustrates both inside and outside English. Inside English is being used in the 1-
ball (top) shot, where the cue tip is hitting the right side of the CB, which is on the cut (“in”) side of
the ball. Outside English is being used in the 2-ball (bottom) shot, where the cue tip is hitting
the CB on the right side, which is away (“out”) from the direction of the cut. Notice that in both
shots, right English is used; but depending on the direction of the cut, the English is given a
different name (“outside” or “inside”). NV A.18, a video demo created by Colin Colenso, does a
good job at showing various types of English and how they affect shot throw.
                            inside English

                                              1

                                                    cut to the right

                                                     cut to the left
                                              2

                            outside English

                               Diagram 1 Inside and outside English

                   NV A.18 – Colin Colenso's throw test video (effects of speed and English)
normal video

    It turns out that with just the right amount of outside English, throw can be eliminated
completely. In this case, the English is referred to as “gearing” outside English because the
CB "rolls" on the OB during impact instead of sliding (e.g., see HSV A.8 and HSV A.62), as if the
two balls were gears meshing together. With no relative sideways motion between the CB and
OB surfaces during impact, there is no sliding friction or throw.

                   HSV A.8 – Outside English cut shot
high-speed video   HSV A.62 – Cut shot with outside English and slow speed

     The amount of English required to achieve “gearing” depends on the cut angle for the shot. If
you want to see the math and physics details, check out TP A.26; if you don’t, just look at
Diagrams 2 and 3, which illustrate the results. Diagram 2 shows how much outside English is
required to achieve throw-less, “gearing” action, for any cut angle. The amount of English is
specified as a percentage of the maximum recommended English, as described in my July ’06
article dealing with “tips of English”. The data for the two example points labeled “A” and “B” in
Diagram 2 are illustrated with shots in Diagram 3. Shot “A” is using 40% outside English for a 30º
cut angle. Shot “B” is using 70% outside English for a 60º cut angle. For both shots, the OB
heads exactly in the impact line (line of centers) direction (i.e., there is absolutely no throw). With
the “gearing” action, the cut angle effect (CIT) exactly cancels the English effects (SIT).

                   TP A.26 – The amount of English required for "gearing" outside English
technical proof
          amount of English required for "gearing" outside
                                                               80%

                                                                                                                  B
                                                               60%

                                                               40%
                                                                                             A

                                                               20%

                                                                0%

                                                                     0º           15º      30º      45º        60º      75º       90º
                                                                                                 cut angle

                                                             Diagram 2 Percent English required for “gearing” for any cut angle

                                                                           1

                                                              30º
                                                                               shot "A"
                                                                                                                                no
                                                                                                             shot "B"         throw
                                                               no                   any
                                                             throw                 speed
                                                                                                                 any
                                                                                                                speed
                                                                          40% outside
                                                                            English                       70% outside
                                                                                                            English             60º
                                                                                                                        2

                                                                          Diagram 3 Example shots from Diagram 2

    For the shots in Diagram 3, if one uses more or less English than indicated, there will be OB
throw (i.e., the OB won’t head in the impact line direction). Diagram 4 shows examples for the
various types of English with the corresponding throw directions. For outside English, the
direction of the throw depends on the amount of English as compared to “gearing” outside
English. All four shots in Diagram 4 are half-ball hits (30º cut angle); so from Diagram 2, 40%
outside English is required for “gearing” action. Shot “A” (the 1-ball shot) shows what happens if
you have less than the “gearing” amount (i.e., “insufficient” outside English; in this case, less than
40%). The CIT effect dominates the SIT effect, and the OB gets thrown to the right. In shot “B”
(the 2-ball shot), the amount of English is more than “gearing” (i.e., “excessive” outside English; in
this case, more than 40%). In this case, the SIT effect dominates the CIT effect, and the OB gets
thrown to the left. In shot “C” (the 3-ball shot) the amount of English is exactly “gearing” (in this
case, exactly 40%) and as shown in Diagram 3, there is no throw whatsoever. In shot “D” (the 4-
ball shot) inside English is being used. In this case, the SIT and CIT effects are in the same
direction, and the OB gets thrown to the right. One might think that the amount of throw in shot
“D” might be the largest because the SIT and CIT are in the same direction. However, as we will
see next month, these effects do not usually add. In fact, there is usually less throw with inside
English as compared to non-gearing outside English.

               CIT > SIT      1
                                                        CIT = SIT       3

                                         shot "A"                                  shot "C"
                         insufficient                                gearing
                       outside English                           outside English

               SIT > CIT      2
                                                        SIT + CIT       4

                                         shot "B"                                  shot "D"
                         excessive                                     inside
                       outside English                                English

      Diagram 4 Examples of throw with various amounts of inside and outside English

    At this point, you might be wondering: “If gearing outside English eliminates throw, why
shouldn’t I use it on every cut shot?” Well, first of all, the type and amount of English you use is
usually dictated by the shot. English is required to help you position the CB for the next shot (see
NV 4.25). Remember, the most important thing in pool (other than having fun, and winning if you
are competitive) is making a shot, and the second most important thing is making the next shot.
That’s where English can help. Secondly, with English comes squirt (see NV 4.13) and swerve
(see NV 4.14). If you are not good at compensating for these effects, throw-less gearing action
won’t be so helpful anyway. We’ll look at squirt and swerve effects and compensation methods in
future articles. Finally, if you don’t have a good intuitive feel for Diagram 2, it might be difficult to
achieve gearing outside English on every shot anyway.
                NV 4.25 – Positioning the cue ball at all spots on the table from an easy side-
                    pocket shot
normal video
                NV 4.13 –Squirt due to high speed English
                NV 4.14 – English curve due to an elevated cue

   I hope you are enjoying and learning from my series of articles dealing with throw. Next
month, we’ll look at the details of how throw varies with shot speed, cut angle, and the type and
amount of English. I’m sure many of you will be surprised by some of the results, so stay tuned.
Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
         If you want to refer back to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access
          them online at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/throw_part_vii_cit_sit_combo.pdf
title: Throw - Part VII: CIT/SIT combo
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David G. Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                           ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Throw – Part VII: CIT/SIT combo”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article help you locate the resources on the website. If you
have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources
from a CD-ROM. See the website for details.

     This is the seventh article in my series dealing with “throw” effects. So far, I’ve looked at
basic terminology, examples of where throw can help you or hurt you in game situations, the
effects of cut angle and speed, the effects of follow and draw, spin-induced throw, and the
difference between inside and outside English. All of my past articles are available on my
website (billiards.colostate.edu) if you want to refer back to them. To refresh your memory,
throw is change in the object ball direction due to sideways forces between the cue ball (CB)
and object ball (OB) during impact. NV 4.15, 4.16, 7.5, and 7.6 show examples of both cut-
induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT). See the video demos and the previous
articles for more information.
                  NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
                  NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video
                  NV 7.5 – Frozen ball throw
                  NV 7.6 – Frozen cue-ball throw

     Last month, we looked at the combined effects of cut angle (CIT) and English (SIT). With
inside English, CIT and SIT are in the same direction but the effects don’t always add. With
outside English, CIT and SIT are in opposite directions and they tend to cancel each other. When
the amount of outside English results in absolutely no throw, we refer to the English as “gearing”
outside English. The amount of English required to achieve “gearing” depends on the cut angle
for the shot (see TP A.26). For a half-ball hit (30º cut angle), 40% English is required. For
smaller cut angles (fuller hits) less English is required, and for larger cut angles (thinner hits)
more is required. If you are unfamiliar with any of these terms, please refer to last month’s article.
Also, view NV A.18 to see the basics of how various types of English affect shot throw.

                  TP A.26 – The amount of English required for "gearing" outside English
technical proof

                  NV A.18 – Colin Colenso's throw test video (effects of speed and English)
normal video

     Last month, we looked at only a few inside and outside English shot examples, and we didn’t
look at the specifics of how much throw you get in different cases. Well, that’s the topic of this
month: how much do you need to adjust for throw for various cut angle shots with various types of
English and shot speeds. After six previous articles, we’re finally ready for this culminating look
at the big picture.

     Diagrams 1 through 4 show example graphs from the throw analysis in TP A.14, which
reveals how OB throw varies with the type and amount of English, cut angle, speed, and
follow/draw/stun. Each graph is a plot of the amount of throw (on the vertical axis) vs. cut angle
(on the horizontal axis), where the throw is the combined result of cut-induced and spin-induced
effects. The three curves show throw for three different types of English: none, inside, and
outside. The amount of English is specified as the percentage of maximum recommended
English (as described in my July ’06 article dealing with “tips of English”). Throw in the CIT
direction is labeled positive (the top half of each graph), and throw in the SIT direction (from
excess outside English) is labeled negative (the bottom half of each graph). Diagrams 1 through
3 are for slow stun shots (where the amount of throw is maximum) with different amounts of
English: 25%, 50%, and 100%. Diagram 4 is for a medium speed follow or draw shot. Only cut
angles up to 60º are included in the graphs because using English is risky with very thin hits. A
thin hit requires much more precision than a thicker hit. Although, if the OB is very close to the
pocket, the shot can be more forgiving to errors due to squirt, swerve, and throw.

                                   TP A.14 – The effects of cut angle, speed, and spin on object ball throw
technical proof

                                 6º
                                            25% inside English

                                 4º

                                                                   no English
                                 2º
                  throw angle

                                                                       25% outside English
                                 0º

                                 -2º
                                                                        fast
                                                                        medium
                                                                                 stun
                                                                        slow     shot
                                 -4º

                                 -6º
                                       0º                        20º                     40º             60º
                                                                         cut angle

                                Diagram 1 Throw vs. cut angle for a slow stun shot with 25% English
               6º
                          50% inside English                  A
                                                                                     no English

               4º
                                                                                       B

               2º
throw angle

                                                                     C           50% outside English
               0º

               -2º
                                                     fast
                                                     medium
                                                              stun
                                 D                   slow     shot
               -4º

               -6º
                     0º                        20º                       40º                          60º
                                                      cut angle

              Diagram 2 Throw vs. cut angle for a slow stun shot with 50% English

               6º
                                                                                   no English

               4º

                                                                               100% inside English
               2º
throw angle

               0º

               -2º
                                                     fast
                                                     medium
                                                              stun
                                                     slow     shot
               -4º

                                                                               100% outside English

               -6º
                     0º                        20º                       40º                          60º
                                                      cut angle

        Diagram 3 Throw vs. cut angle for a slow stun shot with 100% English
                        6º

                        4º

                                                                                        no English
                        2º
                                   50% inside English
          throw angle

                        0º

                                   50% outside English
                        -2º
                                                               fast      follow
                                                               medium   or draw
                                                               slow
                                                                          shot
                        -4º

                        -6º
                              0º                         20º                      40º                60º
                                                                cut angle

 Diagram 4 Throw vs. cut angle for a medium speed follow or draw shot with 50% English

     To help interpret the results in Diagrams 1 through 4, Diagram 5 illustrates the data for the
four example points shown in Diagram 2. Shot “A” is a 34º cut shot with no English, resulting in
5.4º of CIT to the right. If you don’t adjust your aim to account for throw with a slow stun shot like
this, you will usually miss the shot, sometimes very badly. Shot “B” is a 50º cut shot with 50%
inside English, resulting in 3.7º throw to the right, much less than with shot “A.” Shot “C” is a 38º
cut shot with gearing outside English, resulting in absolutely no throw. In this case, the OB will
head exactly in the impact line (line of centers) direction. Shot “D” is a 10º cut shot with 50%
outside English, resulting in 3.7º throw to the left. For a cut angle this small, 50% English is much
more than the “gearing” amount, causing the throw in the SIT direction.
                                                     fast
                                                     medium
                                                     slow

                            1                                               3
                                          shot "A"                                        shot "C"
             34º                                             38º                gearing
                                  no
                                                                                outside
                                English                              0º
               5.4º                                                             English
                                                                   throw
              throw
                                                            10º
                                                                            4
                            2
                                          shot "B"                                        shot "D"
               50º              inside                  -3.7º              more than
                                English                throw                gearing
            3.7º                                                            outside
           throw                                                            English

                          Diagram 5 Example shots from Diagram 2

    Here are some conclusions that can be drawn from the diagrams above and from all of the
graphs at the end of TP A.14:

   -     Maximum throw occurs with slow speed stun shots.

   -     At very small cut angles, inside English and outside English create similar amounts of
         throw (although, in opposite directions).

   -     For large cut angles, a small amount of outside English can result in more throw than
         shots with no English.

   -     For large cut angles, inside English results in less throw than shots with no English.

   -     There is less throw with follow and draw shots as compared to stun shots (see my
         October, 2006 article for more details).

   -     Inside English increases throw at small cut angles, but actually reduces the amount of
         throw at larger cut angles.

   -     Outside English can cause throw in either direction depending on the amount of English
         and the cut angle.

   -     For every cut angle, there is a certain amount of outside English (called "gearing"
         outside English) that results in absolutely no throw (see last month’s article for more
         information).

   -     Outside English can throw the OB left or right, depending upon whether the amount of
         English is greater than or less than the “gearing” amount.

   -     Even for large cut angle shots (thin hits), excess outside English (more than the
         “gearing” amount) can be applied to throw the OB in the SIT direction.

   -     With faster speed, in general, there is less throw. An exception is small cut angle shots
         with small amounts of English (see my 2006 September and December articles for
         details).
      -        For fast speed follow or draw shots there is very little throw, regardless of the type of
               English used.

     I want to remind you that with this entire series of articles on throw, I have ignored the effects
of squirt (see NV 4.13) and swerve (see NV 4.14). I have assumed that you have already
compensated for these effects in your aim. We’ll look at squirt and swerve effects and
compensation methods in future articles. To put all of this throw information to good use, you
really need a firm understanding of squirt and swerve and how to compensate for them. For
example, as we saw above, throw is usually less with faster speeds. However, the effects of
squirt and swerve require more aim compensation at higher speed, even with a low-squirt cue.
To make matters worse, the effective sizes of the pockets are smaller at higher speeds (see my
November ’04 through January ’05 articles). If you have great intuition from years and years of
practice, then maybe you don’t need to know all of this stuff (although, I think knowledge, if used
properly, can always be helpful). If your intuition is not perfect, then maybe the information in
these articles can help speed your intuition-building and learning process.

                    NV 4.13 –Squirt due to high speed English
normal video
                    NV 4.14 – English curve due to an elevated cue

   I hope you are enjoying and learning from my series of articles dealing with throw. Next
month, we’ll look a little closer at outside and inside English. We’ll look at examples of when and
why each might be useful or necessary.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:

    The discussion of speed effects above reminded me of a funny phrase a British buddy of
mine uses. When he first came to America and started playing pool, having played only snooker
previously, he didn’t like that Americans called sidespin “English” instead of “side” (the term used
by snooker players). To get back at us silly Americans, whenever he sees a pool player hitting
the ball too hard, he calls it “American” because he thinks many American pool players often use
too much speed (especially drunk, macho, cowboy types in bars). Isn’t that special? Remember,
especially when using “English,” don’t put too much “American” on the cue ball unless you
absolutely need it.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/throw_part_viii_spin_transfer.pdf
title: Throw - Part VIII: spin transfer
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David G. Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                           ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Throw – Part VIII: spin transfer”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article help you locate the resources on the website. If you
have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources
from a CD-ROM. See the website for details.

     This is the eighth article in my series dealing with “throw” effects. I hope that you’re not
thinking: “Enough, already!” I promise that I’m almost done with throw, and soon I’ll move on to
other topics. Please bear with me a little longer. So far, I’ve looked at basic terminology,
examples of where throw can help you or hurt you in game situations, the effects of cut angle and
speed, the effects of follow and draw, spin-induced throw, the difference between inside and
outside English, and the combination of spin- and cut-induced throw effects. All of my past
articles are available on my website (billiards.colostate.edu) if you want to refer back to them.
To refresh your memory, throw is change in the object ball direction due to sideways forces
between the cue ball (CB) and object ball (OB) during impact. NV 4.15, 4.16, 7.5, and 7.6
show examples of both cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT). See the video
demos and the previous articles for more information.
               NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
               NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video
               NV 7.5 – Frozen ball throw
               NV 7.6 – Frozen cue-ball throw

     Last month, I mentioned that I would cover inside and outside English in more detail and
show examples where each might be appropriate. I lied. I’ll try to cover that topic in a future
article; but for now, I want to discuss throw and its connection to spin transfer. Spin transfer
refers to spin the CB imparts to the OB during collision. Recently, there was a bunch of heated
debate on this topic in the Billiards Digest CCB online discussion forum, hence my desire to cover
this topic in detail now.

     You might be asking yourself: “What does spin transfer have to do with throw?” Good
question. The answer is: “Spin transfer has everything to do with throw, because you can’t have
one without the other.” Diagram 1 illustrates all of the important terminology and physics. Throw
occurs any time there is relative sliding motion between the CB and OB surfaces at impact. In
Diagram 1, the relative motion is a result of CB English. The right English (counterclockwise
spin) creates a sliding friction force that pushes the OB to the left. This force is what creates the
throw angle. Because the throwing force is pushing on the edge of the OB, it also causes the
OB to rotate about its center. Imagine pushing on the outside of a wheel ... the wheel will turn as
a result. The spin imparted to the OB is called transferred spin. In this case, the throwing force
to the left creates clockwise spin on the OB. You cannot have throw without spin transfer
because they both result from the same throwing force. The amount of spin transfer can be as
high as 35.7% (see TP A.27), but it can be much lower. Throw and spin transfer effects will be
smaller for new, clean, polished, and/or waxed balls; but in most pool halls, bars, and home pool
rooms, the balls won’t usually be so ideal. So you better be aware of and know how to correct for
(or use to your advantage) throw and spin transfer effects.
                                          throw
                                          angle
                                                      impact
                                             OB         line
                                            motion

                                                                  OB
                                                                 center
                            transferred
                                spin
                                                      OB
                                                               throwing
                                                                 force
                                              main
                                             impact
                                              force
                                                         CB
                                                        motion

                                                                    CB
                                                                  English
                                                      CB

                  Diagram 1 Throw and spin transfer terminology and physics

                  TP A.27 – Spin transfer
technical proof

     Diagram 2 and NV A.21 show an example bank shot where throw and spin transfer are
critical effects. Without throw and spin transfer, the shot would not be possible as shown. The
goal is to bank the 1-ball cross corner. The problem is the 2-ball. It prevents us from hitting the
1-ball with a cut angle to pocket a normal bank shot. I am assuming that we are using a near
level cue stick so swerve is not much of an effect (i.e., I am not considering a masse shot as an
option here); therefore, I am assuming that the CB hits the 1-ball squarely or very close to
squarely. If you didn’t know about throw and spin transfer, you would not think this shot is
possible. However, by applying left English with slow to medium speed, the shot can be made
fairly easily. The left English on the CB throws the 1-ball to the right, looking from the shooter’s
perspective. The throwing force imparts right (counterclockwise) spin on the 1-ball. The spin
causes the 1-ball rebound angle to lengthen, allowing us to pocket the bank. More detail and
explanations are provided in the video (NV A.21), so be sure to watch it several times and try the
shot out yourself.
                                                  lengthening of rebound
                                                    due to spin transfer

                                                               expected spinless
                                                               rebound direction
                                                            fast
                                                            medium
                                                            slow

                                              2

                                          1
                                                            CB English

                                                            transferred spin
                                         1

                       thrown OB                   impact line
                        direction
                                              throw angle

                 Diagram 2 Bank shot example using throw and spin transfer

                NV A.21 – Bank shot using throw and spin transfer
normal video

     Per my December ’06 article, to get maximum throw, use a soft stroke and about 50% stun
English (i.e., side spin only). The amount of throw and spin transfer for the shot in Diagram 2 will
depend on ball conditions, so if you want to try out the shot yourself, which I highly recommend,
you might need to experiment with speed and/or the amount of English. Remember, above 50%
English, more isn’t better (i.e., you don’t get more throw with more English). If you are using new,
clean, and/or polished balls, you might not be able to get enough throw and spin transfer action.
If that’s the case, visit your local bar or pool hall, and you will likely get more action than you need
or want. Also, the condition of the cushion and cloth will affect the rebound angle (e.g., humidity
can make the cushions more sticky than normal, creating more reaction to the transferred spin),
so the required speed and English will vary from table to table.

     I’m sure there are some folks out there who firmly believe that throw and spin transfer don’t
exist. Well, I hope this article helps convert them over a little. My whole recent series of articles
should convince people without a doubt that throw does exists. If throw doesn’t exist, I should be
committed to a mental institution; because if it doesn’t exists, I have been in an extreme
delusional state these last eight months. Either that or my pool balls have been violating the laws
of throw-less physics. As for spin transfer, Diagram 1 provides conceptual proof of why it must
exist. The force that creates throw must also cause the OB to spin. If that’s not proof enough,
HSV A.66 provides a high-speed video demonstration of the effect; and for the physics nerds out
there, TP A.27 provides a physics-based mathematical proof. If the non-believers in the
congregation are still skeptical, the only thing else I can do is ask them to just have faith ... spin
transfer does exist, and it can affect pool shots.
                   HSV A.66 – Straight-on shot with English and slow speed
high-speed video

    I hope you are enjoying and learning from my series of articles dealing with throw. Next
month, I’ll look at another example of throw and spin transfer that some people claim proves that
throw and spin transfer don’t exist. You probably know the bottom line of next month’s article
already: the claim is a bunch of hooey.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/throw_part_x_the_big_picture.pdf
title: Throw - Part X: the big picture
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                                   ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Throw – Part X: the big picture”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article help you locate the resources on the website. If you
have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources
from a CD-ROM or DVD. See the website for details.

    This is the tenth article in my series dealing with “throw” and English effects. So far, I’ve
looked at basic terminology, examples of where throw can help you or hurt you in game
situations, the effects of cut angle and speed, the effects of follow and draw, spin-induced throw,
the difference between inside and outside English, the combination of spin- and cut-induced
throw effects, and spin transfer. If you want to refer back to any of my past articles, they are all
available on my website (billiards.colostate.edu). To refresh your memory, throw is change in
the object ball direction due to sideways forces between the cue ball (CB) and object ball (OB)
during impact. NV 4.15, 4.16, 7.5, and 7.6 show examples of both cut-induced throw (CIT) and
spin-induced throw (SIT). See the video demos and previous articles for more information.
               NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
               NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video
               NV 7.5 – Frozen ball throw
               NV 7.6 – Frozen cue-ball throw

     This month I want to step back a little from the throw focus a little and look at the “bigger
picture” concerning English. Diagram 1 illustrates all of the effects that come into play when
using English (sidespin). When you strike the cue ball (CB) off center, the CB squirts away from
the aiming line (see NV 4.13 and NV A.17). In other words, it doesn’t go where the stick is
aiming. The amount of squirt varies a lot with the amount of tip offset from center and a little with
shot speed. The CB also swerves (curves) on its way to the OB (see NV 4.14 and NV 7.12). The
amount of swerve depends on cue stick elevation, shot speed, and distance between the CB and
object ball (OB). Finally, the OB gets thrown off the impact line (AKA “line of centers”) on its way
to the target (see NV 4.15, NV 4.16, and NV A.21). As we have seen in the last nine articles, the
amount of throw varies with cut angle, speed, top/bottom spin, and the amount and type of
English. If you don’t compensate your aim for squirt, swerve, and throw when playing pool (either
consciously or sub-consciously), you will never be a great player.
                                                                                   throw
                                               squirt    thrown OB
                                                                                   angle
                                               angle      direction
                                initial
                             CB direction
                                                                                 impact
                                                                                   line

               typical cue                                                  right
                elevation                   aiming         curved       English (spin)
                              right
                             English          line        CB path          on CB
                                                          (swerve)

                                        Diagram 1 English effects

                    NV 4.13 – Squirt due to high speed English
                    NV 4.14 – English curve due to an elevated cue
                    NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
                    NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
normal video        NV 7.12 – Small-curve massé shot
                    NV A.17 – English deflection (squirt) vs. speed
                    NV A.21 – Bank shot using throw and spin transfer

    Fortunately, the amount of squirt for a given cue stick is fairly predictable for most shots.
Also, there are some aiming techniques you can use to help compensate your aim for squirt. The
most widely known is called back-band English (BHE), also known as the “aim and pivot” method.
Diagram 2 shows how the method works. First, Diagram 2a shows what happens if you don’t
compensate for squirt ... the CB doesn’t go where the cue stick is aiming. To correct for this, you
can first aim the shot by lining up the tip at the center of the CB (see Diagram 2b). Then you
pivot the cue stick on your bridge the amount necessary to achieve the desired amount of
English. If the bridge pivot point is in the right place for the given cue stick and amount of tip
offset, the amount of pivot can exactly cancel the amount of squirt, and the CB will head in the
desired direction (see Diagram 2c). That’s the good news. The bad news is that every cue stick
has a different natural pivot point. Also, the required pivot point location might not be at a
comfortable bridge length for you, and the point might not be in the exact same place for every
type of shot.
               wrong CB                                                        desired CB
               direction                                                        direction

  aiming                                                              aiming
    line         squirt               aiming                            line
                 angle                  line                                      squirt angle exactly
                                                                                  cancels pivot angle

                                                     aim
                                                   shot for
                                                  center-ball
                                                      hit
                                 bridge
                                 length
                                                                                        pivot stick
                                                     bridge                        about bridge point
                                                      point                          with back hand
                                                                                   for desired English

(a) squirt with no                                                    (c) pivot for English
                                      (b) BHE aim setup
    aim compensation                                                      and aim adjustment

                  Diagram 2 BHE “aim and pivot” squirt compensation method

    Low-squirt (AKA “low deflection”) cues can require an extremely large bridge length to use
BHE aim compensation.         Some people actually recommend front-hand English (FHE)
compensation instead for low-squirt cues. With FHE, you keep the grip hand stationary while you
move your bridge hand left or right. If the distance from your grip hand to your bridge happens to
match the natural pivot distance for the stick, again the amount of pivot will exactly cancel the
squirt ... theoretically.

    If you want more information on the BHE method, see Bob Jewett’s October ’02 article (a link
to Bob’s articles can be found at the bottom of the “Instructional Articles” section of my website).
For a detailed explanation and demonstrations by Colin Colenso, see NV A.19. If you want to
see some experimental data for squirt amounts and natural pivot point distances for various
popular cues, see the “deflection/squirt” link under “Platinum Billiards” in the “Links” area of my
website.

                  NV A.19 – Colin Colenso's back-hand-English saga (for squirt compensation)
normal video

    Another problem with BHE and FHE aim compensation is that swerve and throw are not
taken into consideration. Therefore, the methods will not work well for all tip offsets, shot speeds,
cue stick elevations, and distances between the CB and OB. Now, if the CB and OB are not too
far apart and if fast shot speed is used, swerve is not as much a factor (e.g., see NV A.19).
Sometimes, the faster speed also helps reduce the amount of throw and make it more predictable
(see my September ’06, December ’06, and February ’07 articles).

    Another thing you can do to help minimize the effects of swerve is to keep the cue stick as
horizontal as possible (i.e., almost touching the rail). But as shown in TP A.3, if the cue stick
extends over a rail, it is always elevated a little, and with English will come swerve. The other
thing you can do is practice a lot to get an intuitive feel for the amount of swerve for all types of
shots (various amounts of English, various cue stick elevations, various speeds, various
distances between the CB and OB) on various types and conditions of cloth. If you must have
cue stick elevation for a given shot (e.g., to reach over an obstacle ball with an elevated bridge),
you should avoid English if at all possible (unless a masse shot is required). Also, any time you
elevate the cue stick, and you plan to not use English, you should be very careful to make sure
the cue tip hits the vertical centerline of the CB. You should consider focusing on the CB contact
point during your final stroke (see the stroke “best practices” document in the “Instructor and
Student resources” section of my website). Unintentional English can be a real shot killer,
especially when the cue stick is elevated.

                  TP A.3 – Minimum cue stick elevation required for a head-spot-to-foot-spot
technical proof       center-ball-hit shot

     The last effect to consider is throw. Actually, we have been “considering” this effect in the
last nine articles. As we have seen, the amount of throw varies with cut angle, speed, top/bottom
spin, and the amount and type of English.

     With new, clean, and smooth balls, the amount of throw will be less as compared to other ball
conditions. An exception is when a chalk smudge happens to appear exactly at the contact point
between the CB and OB. In this case, the amount of throw will be much greater than normal.
This effect is called “cling” (AKA “kick” or “skid”). The frequency of cling (excessive throw) will
usually be worse with old, dirty, and/or rough balls. Also, on cloth that is new, thin, and slick,
cling might occur more often, because chalk smudges on the CB might tend to wear off less
easily. What might make this effect even more noticeable is if the balls also happen to be new,
clean, and/or polished (e.g., which might often be the case with televised tournament conditions).
Because the amount of throw is less with these ball conditions, when cling does occur, it can be
strikingly noticeable. Anytime you see chalk smudges on the CB, you should wipe them off (or
ask for a referee to wipe them off if you are in the middle of a tournament game). We have
enough reasons to miss shots as it is without having to worry about excessive and unpredictable
throw due to cling.

     Because the amount of CIT or SIT can vary with ball conditions, and because cling is always
a possibility, many players prefer to use outside English (OE) on many cut shots. As described
and illustrated in my January ’07 article, throw can be reduced and even eliminated if a “gearing”
amount of OE is used for a given cut angle. So if you are good a judging the amount of “gearing”
OE, this might be a good approach for you. Unfortunately, OE isn’t always an appropriate choice
for a given shot. The main purpose for English, after all, is to position the CB for the next shot
(e.g., see NV 4.25). Often we don’t have the luxury to be able to use OE on every shot. If the CB
will hit a rail, the English will affect where the CB will go, and usually we need it to go in certain
directions (e.g., towards good position for the next shot).

                  NV 4.25 – Positioning the cue ball at all spots on the table from an easy side-
normal video
                      pocket shot

    Even for near straight-in (i.e., very small cut angle) shots, some players recommend using a
touch of OE. The potential problem with center-ball hits (where you aim the cue tip at the vertical
centerline of the CB) is if you are off a little to the left, the OB will be thrown a little to the right,
and if you are a little off to the right, the OB will be thrown a little to the left (ignoring squirt and
swerve effects). Some people think it is better to aim slightly to one side of center (on the OE
side) so the amount of throw will be less and in a predictable direction.

     There are several exceptions to the rule when using OE. If there is a large distance between
the CB and OB, squirt and swerve become significant factors, so less or no English might be
better in these cases. Thin cuts shots is another area for caution. With thin cuts, aiming
precision is key, so English and the associated squirt and swerve are too risky. If your aim is way
off due to squirt or swerve, no amount of OE will help you make a thin cut.
    Concerning cling, it is important to know that it should not happen very often. Therefore,
maybe you shouldn’t think about it too much, unless the balls appear to be covered with chalk
smudges ... in which case, you should think about it a lot. In general, the more bad things you
worry about, the more likely you are of missing a shot. Just use whatever English you need on
the shot and aim to compensate for squirt, swerve, and a normal amount of throw. Now, if OE is
acceptable for a shot, consider using it because it can reduce and even eliminate throw. If OE is
not appropriate, then so be it ... use whatever the shot requires. Now if your aim compensation is
good and your stroke is perfect and you miss a shot because of “cling,” just chalk it up to “bad
luck.” It won’t happen often. The reality is: you can’t totally avoid it; although, you can keep the
balls clean (especially the CB) to help reduce its frequency.

    Concerning use of OE, if you are not good with squirt and swerve compensation or correctly
judging the amount of OE required for each cut angle to achieve throw-less “gearing” action (see
my January ’07 article), then OE might not be the best approach for you. Maybe you should
consider using English less often (i.e., only when you absolutely need it) instead, especially if you
are a beginner or intermediate player. All of the topics in this article, especially the use of OE,
have been heavily debated on the BD CCB online discussion forum lately. There is rarely a
strong consensus on the conclusions. Therefore, you should take everything in this article with a
grain or two of salt.

      I hope you’ve been enjoying my series of articles on throw and English effects. Next month,
I’ll conclude my series by summarizing all of the useful information from the last ten articles.
Hopefully, this summary will help you pull everything together and maybe even help you at the
table during practice and play.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS: I know other authors and I tend to use a lot of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, cling, stun,
impact line, 30 degree rule, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms.
If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the glossary
in my book. For convenience, an electronic copy is posted online in the “Instructor and Student
Resources” section of my website.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/throw_part_xi_everything_you_ever_wanted_to_know_about_throw.pdf
title: Throw - Part XI: everything you ever wanted to know about throw
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                      ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Throw – Part XI: everything you ever wanted to know about throw”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article help you locate the resources on the website. If you
have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources
from a CD-ROM or DVD. See the website for details.

     This is the eleventh article in my series dealing with throw and English effects. If you are
tired of reading about throw, don’t despair ... I’m almost done. I’ll conclude next month with my
final article in the series. So far, I’ve looked at basic terminology, examples of where throw can
help you or hurt you in game situations, the effects of cut angle and speed, the effects of follow
and draw, spin-induced throw, the difference between inside and outside English, the
combination of spin- and cut-induced throw effects, spin transfer, and the big picture of squirt,
swerve and throw. If you want to refer back to any of my past articles, they are all available on
my website (billiards.colostate.edu).

    To refresh your memory, throw is change in object ball (OB) direction due to sideways
forces between the cue ball (CB) and object ball during impact. NV 4.15, 4.16, 7.5, 7.6, and
A.21 show examples of both cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT). When
using English, in addition to understanding throw, it is also important to understand the effects of
squirt (see NV 4.13 and NV A.17) and swerve (see NV 4.14 and NV 7.12). See the video demos
and last month’s article for illustrations and more information.
                 NV 4.13 – Squirt due to high speed English
                 NV 4.14 – English swerve due to an elevated cue
                 NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
                 NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
                 NV 7.5 – Frozen ball throw
normal video     NV 7.6 – Frozen cue-ball throw
                 NV 7.12 – Small-curve massé shot
                 NV A.17 – English deflection (squirt) vs. speed
                 NV A.21 – Bank shot using throw and spin transfer

     In this article, I wish to summarize many of the conclusions and results from the past ten
articles as a culminating reference. Because there is so much terminology in this article, I though
I would first summarize definitions for many of the important terms:

      cling: excessive friction and throw caused by non-ideal surface conditions at the point of
          contact between two balls (e.g., a chalk smudge).

      cut-induced throw (CIT): throw caused by a cut angle.

      English: sidespin imparted to the CB by hitting the CB left or right of center.

      gearing outside English: the amount of outside English that results in no sliding between
         the CB and OB during contact. Instead, during contact, the CB rolls on the OB as if the
         two balls were like meshing gears. The result is no throw.

      impact line (AKA line-of-centers): the imaginary line through the CB and OB centers at
         impact. The OB moves along this line after impact (unless there is throw).
      inside English (IE): English created by hitting the CB on the side towards the direction of
          the shot (i.e. on the “inside” of the CB). For example, when the CB strikes an OB on the
          left side, creating a cut shot to the right, right sidespin would be called “inside English.”
          Illustrations can be found in my January ’07 article.

      outside English (OE): English created by hitting the CB on the side away from the direction
          of the shot (i.e. on the “outside” of the CB). For example, when the CB strikes an OB on
          the left side, creating a cut shot to the right, left sidespin would be called “outside
          English.” Illustrations can be found in my January ’07 article.

      percentage English: amount of sidespin applied to the CB, specified as a percentage of the
          maximum possible amount occurring on the verge of a miscue. For a well-chalked, well-
          shaped tip, the maximum amount of cue tip offset possible (before miscue) is about half
          the CB’s radius. See my July ’06 article for illustrations and for explanations of how this
          relates to “tips of English.”

      spin-induced throw (SIT): throw caused by CB English.

      squirt (AKA CB deflection): angular displacement of the CB path away from the cue stick
         stroking direction caused by the use of English. The effect increases with the amount of
         English.

      swerve (AKA CB curve): curve of the CB’s path due to cue stick elevation and English.

      throw: change in the OB direction (away from the impact line) due to sideways forces
          between the CB and OB during impact.

     As we have seen throughout my throw series, the amount of throw for a given shot varies
with cut angle, speed, the amount of top- or bottom-spin, and the type and amount of English. If
you don’t compensate your aim for squirt, swerve, and throw when playing pool (either
consciously or sub-consciously), you will never be a great player. In TP A.28, I have created
numerous plots that illustrate all of the effects related to throw. To be able to accurately
compensate for throw, you must have knowledge and/or solid intuition of these effects. TP A.28
contains 36 different plots, but I will include here only a small collection that illustrates several
important effects. Diagram 1 shows how throw varies with cut angle for stun shots at various
speeds. Diagram 2 shows how throw varies with cut angle for follow or draw shots with 50% OE
and various speeds. Diagram 3 shows how throw varies with the amount of English for a full-ball
hit at various speeds. And Diagram 4 shows how throw varies with the amount and type of
English for half-ball-hit follow or draw shots at various speeds.

                  TP A.28 – Throw plots for all types of shots
technical proof

     Below, I summarize many conclusions that can be drawn from the plots. Even if you have
trouble understanding what all of the plots in TP A.28 mean, look at them anyway. When you see
how much everything varies with the type and amount of English and spin, speed, and cut angle,
it will help you understand why this game can sometimes be so hard, and you can see why it
takes so much practice and experience to build solid intuition for knowing how to adjust for
everything.
                                                                           0% spin (stun), 0% English

                             6º
                                                                                      A

                             4º

                             2º
             throw amount

                             0º
                                               fast                                    fast                                fast
                                               medium                                  medium                              medium
                                               slow                                    slow                                slow

                             -2º

                             -4º    7/8-ball
                                       hit                                         1/2-ball           1/4-ball         1/8-ball
                                                               3/4-ball               hit               hit               hit
                                                                  hit

                             -6º
                                    0º                   15º                 30º                45º              60º                 75º
                                                                                   cut angle

                Diagram 1 Throw vs. cut angle for various speed stun shots

                                                        or                100% follow or draw, 50% outside English

                            6º
                                              fast                                     fast                                 fast
                                              medium                                   medium                               medium
                                              slow                                     slow                                 slow

                            4º

                            2º
     throw amount

                            0º

                                                             B
                            -2º

                            -4º    7/8-ball
                                     hit                                           1/2-ball           1/4-ball          1/8-ball
                                                             3/4-ball                 hit               hit                hit
                                                                hit

                            -6º
                                   0º                    15º                 30º                45º              60º                  75º
                                                                                   cut angle

Diagram 2 Throw vs. cut angle for various speed, full-spin, 50% OE shots
                                                                            full-ball hit with stun

                                 6º
                                                       C

                                 4º

                                 2º
                                                            fast                           fast                fast
                 throw amount

                                                            medium                         medium              medium
                                                            slow                           slow                slow

                                 0º

                                 -2º

                                 -4º

                                 -6º

                                  -100%             -50%                          0                    50%               100%

                                                                               English

       Diagram 3 Throw vs. English for various speed, full-ball hit stun shots

                                                            1/2-ball hit with 50% follow or draw
                                6º

                                4º

                                2º
         throw amount

                                0º
                                                                                                  D

                                -2º
                                          fast                     fast                    fast
                                          medium                   medium                  medium
                                          slow                     slow                    slow

                                -4º

                                -6º

                                100% IE            50% IE                        0                    50% OE            100% OE

                                                                              English

Diagram 4 Throw vs. English for various speed, 1/2-ball hit, 50% draw or follow shots
      To help interpret the results in Diagrams 1 through 4, Diagram 5 illustrates the data for the
four example points (A, B, C, D) shown. Shot “A” (from Diagram 1) is a 35º cut-angle stun shot
with no English, resulting in 5.8º of throw to the right. If you don’t adjust your aim to account for
throw with a slow stun shot like this, you will usually miss the shot, sometimes very badly. Shot
“B” (from Diagram 2) is a 15º cut-angle, 100%-follow shot with 50% OE, resulting in 1.6º throw to
the left. Here, the OE more than compensates for the CIT effect, resulting in SIT in the opposite
direction (see my January ’07 article for more information). Also, as we saw in my October ’06
article, follow and draw reduce the amount of throw. Shot “C” (from Diagram 3) is a 0º cut-angle
(full-ball hit) stun shot with 55% left English, resulting in 5.6º of throw to the right. If you want to
achieve maximum throw with a full-ball hit, a slow-speed stun shot with about 50% of maximum
English results in the most throw. Shot “D” (from Diagram 4) is a half-ball hit (30º cut angle) shot
with 50% follow and 45% OE, resulting in absolutely no throw. In this case, the OB will head
exactly in the impact line (line of centers) direction. The amount of OE used here is called the
“gearing” amount, because it results in the CB rolling (instead of sliding) along the OB during
contact, as if the balls were gears meshing together. The amount of OE required to eliminate
throw is different for every cut angle (see my January ’07 article for more information)

                                                   fast
                                                   medium
                                                   slow

                                                                       3
                              1
                                        shot "A"             5.6º                     shot "C"
              35º                                           throw

                  5.8º
                 throw

                              2                                         4
               15º
                                        shot "B"            30º                       shot "D"
                                                                            gearing
             -1.6º                                                          outside
            throw                                              no
                                                             throw          English

                     Diagram 5 Example shots for the points in Diagrams 1-4

     As I described in last month’s article, the amount of throw can vary significantly with ball
conditions, so all of the numbers in the plots and diagrams in this article might not be the same as
with the equipment you use. I’ve tried to use typical numbers consistent with typical conditions,
but the only way to know is to shoot some test shots and calibrate your adjustments for the
playing conditions (I’ll discuss this further next month). Before playing important games on any
equipment, you should always first get a feel for the equipment (i.e., gage the speed of the cloth,
the rebound characteristics of the cushions, and the maximum amount of throw for the balls).
New, clean, and smooth balls (e.g., top tournament-condition balls) will exhibit less throw than
old, dirty, beat-up balls (e.g., typical bar, home-room, and pool-hall balls). Also, as described last
month, balls can sometimes cling (e.g., when a chalk smudge happens to appear right at the
contact point between the CB and OB).
    I want to conclude this article with a summary of all of the important conclusions from all of
my recent articles and from all of the plots in TP A.28:
   For small cut angle shots (i.e., fuller hits), the amount of CIT does not vary with shot speed,
    but increases with cut angle.
   For larger cut angle shots (i.e., thinner hits), the amount of CIT is significantly larger for
    slower speed shots as compared to faster speed shots.
   The amount of CIT decreases some with larger cut angles, but not by much (especially for
    slower speed shots).
   Maximum CIT occurs at close to a half-ball hit (30º cut angle).
   In general, throw is larger at slower speeds, and for stun shots.
   Both follow and draw reduce throw, and they do so by the same amount.
   The largest discrepancy between throw values for stun and follow/draw shots occurs close to
    a half-ball hit (30º cut angle).
   The difference between the throw of stun and follow/draw shots is not as great at larger cut
    angles.
   More English gives you more SIT only up to a point. Additional English beyond that point
    actually reduces the amount of SIT (i.e., more English doesn’t always give you more throw).
   SIT is largest for a slow stun shot with about 50% of maximum English.
   The amount of throw can increase significantly as a small amount of English is added,
    especially for a stun shot.
   SIT is independent of speed (i.e., the throw is the same at all speeds) for small amounts of
    English.
   "Gearing" OE results in absolutely no throw. The amount of English required for “gearing”
    increases with cut angle. At a half-ball hit, the amount of English required is about 50%.
   At very small cut angles, IE and OE create similar amounts of throw (although, in opposite
    directions).
   For large cut angles, a small amount of OE can result in more throw than shots with no
    English.
   For large cut angles, IE results in less throw than shots with no English.
   IE increases throw at small cut angles, but actually reduces the amount of throw at larger cut
    angles.
   OE can cause throw in either direction depending on the amount of English and the cut
    angle.
   Even for large cut angle shots (thin hits), excess OE (more than the “gearing” amount) can be
    applied to throw the OB in the SIT direction.
   The amount of throw with IE can be much more consistent than with OE if the amount of
    English varies a little. In other words, the amount of throw varies more with tip placement for
    OE vs. IE. This might explain why some people prefer using IE on cut shots ... because they
    can better anticipate and adjust for the amount of throw.

   Please refer to my recent articles for more information and to see examples of how all of this
knowledge (and/or intuition built by years of successful experience) can be useful in your game. I
hope you’ve been enjoying my series of articles on throw and English effects. Next month, I’ll
conclude the series by looking at how you might calibrate yourself for different playing conditions,
and I’ll try to simplify some of the throw results a little to make it easier for you to use in your
game.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS: I know other authors and I tend to use a lot of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, cling, stun,
impact line, 30 degree rule, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms.
If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the glossary
in my book. For convenience, an expanded electronic copy is posted online in the “Instructor and
Student Resources” section of my website.

Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/throw_part_xii_calibration_and_hold_shots.pdf
title: Throw - Part XII: calibration, and hold shots
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore (“Dr. Dave”)                                        ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“Throw – Part XII: calibration, and hold shots”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP) can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The
reference numbers used in the article help you locate the resources on the website. If you
have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the resources
from a CD-ROM or DVD. See the website for details.

    This is the twelfth and final article in my series dealing with throw and English effects. Over
the past year, I’ve looked at examples of where throw can help you or hurt you in game
situations, the effects of cut angle and speed, the effects of follow and draw, spin-induced throw,
the difference between inside and outside English, the combination of spin- and cut-induced
throw effects, spin transfer, and the big picture of squirt, swerve and throw. If you want to refer
back to any of my past articles, they are all available on my website (billiards.colostate.edu).

    To refresh your memory, throw is change in object ball direction due to sideways forces
between the cue ball and object ball during impact. NV 4.15, 4.16, 7.5, 7.6, and A.21 show
examples of both cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT). When using English,
in addition to understanding throw, it is also important to understand the effects of squirt (see NV
4.13 and NV A.17) and swerve (see NV 4.14 and NV 7.12). See the video demos and my last
two articles for definitions, illustrations, and more information.
                      NV 4.13 – Squirt due to high speed English
                      NV 4.14 – English swerve due to an elevated cue
                      NV 4.15 – Using throw to make a partially blocked shot
                      NV 4.16 – Over-cutting a cut shot to compensate for throw
                      NV 7.5 – Frozen ball throw
normal video          NV 7.6 – Frozen cue-ball throw
                      NV 7.12 – Small-curve massé shot
                      NV A.17 – English deflection (squirt) vs. speed
                      NV A.21 – Bank shot using throw and spin transfer

    In last month’s article, I had intended to provide a concise summary of many of the important
conclusions from my entire series of articles. However, due to space constraints, the list didn’t
make it into the magazine. Fortunately, the online version of my article is the original full-length
version. Please refer to it if you want to see the complete summary. The most important basic
conclusions are:

               1. Maximum CIT occurs with slow, stun shots with cut angles of about 30 degrees and
                  larger (e.g., about 1/2-ball hit or thinner). Therefore, you need to adjust your aim to
                  compensate for throw more with these types of shots (see my August ’06 and
                  September ’06 articles for more info). If you use faster speed and/or follow or draw,
                  the amount of throw and required amount of adjustment is less (see my October ’06
                  article).

               2. Maximum SIT occurs with slow, stun shots with about 50% English. So if you are
                  faced with a shot where you need maximum throw to create an angle that isn’t there,
                  hit the shot softly and don’t use too much English (see my December ’06 article for
                  more information).
     It is important to remember that throw can vary dramatically from one set of ball conditions to
another. New, high quality, and clean balls (e.g., those typical in professional tournaments) will
usually throw much less than old, beat-up, and dirty balls (e.g., those typical in “bar boxes”).
Therefore, it is important to “calibrate” yourself for the conditions under which you will be playing.
You need to know how much to adjust your aim for different types of shots for different ball
conditions. Also, if you need throw to execute a shot, you need to know how much throw is
possible. Diagram 1 shows a test set-up you can use to calibrate yourself for given ball
conditions. The 1-ball is on the foot spot and the 2-ball is frozen to the 1-ball, with the line
between their centers heading straight up-table. The cue ball is about a foot away on a line going
through the first diamond beyond the opposite side pocket. Hit the shot softly with just enough
speed for the 2-ball to reach the head rail, and measure the throw distance “x.” This shot set-up
will produce the maximum throw possible for any cut angle (see my September ’06 article for
more information). Please try this shot out on various tables (e.g., pool hall, bar, home tables,
show room, etc.) to see how significant throw can be, and to see how much the throw amount can
vary from one set of balls to the next. This will help you appreciate how important it is to calibrate
yourself to different conditions.

                    throw      aim at 1st diamond
                    angle      past the side pocket
             2
  x
                                                                       2 1

                                      d                                                ~35º
                      impact line                                            fast
                  (line of centers)                                          medium
                                                                             slow

                                                                      stun

                     Diagram 1 Test shot for measuring maximum throw

     Throw angles, like those that have appeared in all of the plots and examples in my previous
articles, can be calculated from distance measurements using the trigonometry arctangent
function. If you don’t’ have access to a scientific calculator, luckily Google (www.google.com)
can do the calculation for you. For example, if you measure a rail throw distance (x) of 6 inches
and the travel distance (d) is 65 inches, you just need to type in “atan(6/65) * 180/pi” in the
Google search box and hit the Enter key. Google will magically report the answer in degrees (in
this case 5.3º).

     Small angles can be difficult to visualize and quantify for most people, so a better way to
describe the amount of throw is in units of “inches per foot” (inches/foot). It is easy to visualize
how far the object ball will travel in feet. And if you know the expected amount of throw in units of
inches/foot, you can easily estimate how much you need to adjust your aim. For the example
above, d = 65 inches = 65/12 feet = 5.4 feet. Therefore, the throw amount is about 1 inch per foot
(6 inches / 5.4 feet = 1.1 inches/foot). This is a fairly common value under typical ball conditions.
And since the diamonds are about 1 foot apart on larger tables, a good rule of thumb is: you get
about 1 inch of maximum throw per diamond of travel for typical ball conditions. But again, the
amount of throw will vary significantly with ball conditions, so make sure you do the test shot in
Diagram 1. The amount of throw for a given shot also depends on cut angle, speed, amount and
type of English, and amount of spin (per my previous eleven articles for more information).

    I want to close this series of articles by looking at how throw can be used to help limit cue ball
motion for a small cut-angle shot. Diagram 2 illustrates an example shot where we need to
pocket the 1-ball while “holding” the cue ball for position on the 8-ball shot. The question is: Can
you hold the cue ball more easily if you use English? The answer is: Yes ... most of the time.
Diagram 3 shows the effect of using English as compared to not using English. It is assumed
that the object ball is heading in the same direction and with the same speed in both shots. It
turns out throw can be used to reduce the amount of cue ball drift (see the bottom shot in
Diagram 3). The spin-induced throw allows you to hit the object ball on the left side a little
(creating a small cut angle to the right), and still have the object ball head to the left a little.
Friction between the balls throws the object ball to the left and throws the cue ball to the right, but
the cut angle reduces the net cue ball speed. TP A.29 shows all of the math and physics behind
the effect. Now, the reduction in cue ball drift might not be very large (e.g., an inch or less), but
sometimes even a half cue-ball roll can mean the difference between a win and a loss (e.g., with
the shot in Diagram 2).

                                         can "cheat" the
                                          pocket a little

                                        need to limit
                             1          cue ball drift

                             8

                      Diagram 2 Example shot requiring cue ball “hold”
                                                           more cue ball drift     object ball heading in
                     stun                                                             same direction
                                                             with cut shot
        fast
        medium
        slow

                                                             less cue ball drift
                  stun with                                     with throw
               50% right English

                      Diagram 3 Comparison of cue-ball hold with and without throw

                      TP A.29 – Using throw to limit cue ball motion
technical proof

      The reason I wrote “most of the time” in my answer to the question in the previous paragraph
is that a throw-assisted hold-shot becomes less effective for larger distances between the cue
ball and object ball. When the balls are close, it is fairly easy to control. However, at larger
distances, squirt and swerve become larger factors. It also becomes more difficult to achieve
stun with a longer drag shot (i.e., it’s tougher to judge how much bottom spin and speed to use).
Remember, to achieve maximum throw, you want stun at object ball impact. Also, not only are
squirt and swerve tougher to adjust for at greater distances, the swerve also hurts the shot angle
a little, making it more difficult to hold the cue ball. Also, as shown in TP A.29, distance reduces
the effectiveness of the cue ball angle vs. the cut angle. You might think that you can eliminate
the effects of swerve by using faster speed, but the problem is that you get much less SIT at
faster speeds. Bob Jewett proposed an experiment in his July ’03 article (see his Diagram 3) that
can help you see the results of some of these effects (a link to Bob’s articles is available at the
bottom of the “Instructional Articles” section of my website). Give the experiment a try if you’re
still not convinced.

    I hope you have enjoyed and learned from my series of articles on throw and English effects.
Have you been able to incorporate some of the knowledge into your game? I also hope you look
forward to a totally new topic next month. Even I am getting a little tired of focusing on throw and
spin transfer effects (even though I appreciate their importance).

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS: I know other authors and I tend to use a lot of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, cling, stun,
impact line, 30 degree rule, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms.
If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the glossary
in my book. For convenience, an expanded electronic copy is posted online in the “Instructor and
Student Resources” section of my website.
Dr. Dave is a mechanical engineering professor at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, CO.
He is also author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards.”
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/throw_shots_you_need_to_know.pdf
title: Throw Shots You Need To Know
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Throw Shots You Need to Know”                                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    There are many throw shots that can help you win games. I recently posted a YouTube video (NV L.69)
that demonstrates useful examples, and I describe them below.

      Throw refers to change in object ball (OB) direction caused by friction or rubbing between balls. When
rubbing and throw are due to cut angle, it is called cut-induced throw or CIT. And when rubbing and throw are
due to sidespin, it is called spin-induced throw or SIT. See the throw tutorial page at billiards.colostate.edu
for illustrations, demonstrations, and more information dealing with these important principles.

     Anytime you slow-roll a ball or use stun, where the cue ball (CB) has no top or bottom spin at the OB, throw
is a concern. As demonstrated in online video NV L.69, one way to correct for throw is to just overcut the ball.
Another way to deal with throw is to use gearing outside spin. With the correct amount of sidespin, there is no
throw whatsoever. See the video and the gearing spin resource page at billiards.colostate.edu for
demonstrations and more information.

     Throw is especially important with rail cut shots (see Image 1). If you hit the OB 1st or the OB and cushion
at the same time, as many “old timers” suggest, the OB gets thrown into the cushion and bounces away from
the rail. To pocket this shot cleanly, you need to hit the cushion slightly before the ball (or use gearing outside
spin). The CB compresses the cushion a little, cutting the ball away from the cushion enough to cancel the
throw effect. Again, see the video for demonstrations.

                                             Image 1 Rail cut shot
Billiards Digest                                      1                                                  March 2025
     Image 2 shows an example where we need maximum SIT to pocket the 8 in the corner. A straight hit with
no sidespin, barely missing the 1 and 5, would send the 8 straight up-table, well to the right of the pocket (see
the white line). But using right sidespin, the 8 can be thrown in. As with all sidespin shots, I use the System
for Aiming With Sidespin (SAWS) to get an accurate line of aim that corrects for CB deflection. See the links
in the YouTube video description for more information. It might look like the aim in Image 2 is too far the right
(see the red line), where I might hit the 5; but right sidespin deflects the CB to the left, creating a square hit on
the 8. As demonstrated in the video, to get the most SIT you need to use slow-speed stun with about half of
maximum sidespin.

                                    Image 2 Spin-induced throw (SIT) shot

    Image 3 shows an example where we need maximum CIT. It might not look like it is possible to pocket the
8 in the corner. A near miss of the 1 provides no cut angle to the left (see the white line and the extra CB at
the ghost-ball position). However, the 8 can be thrown in with CIT (see the black line). We need almost
maximum throw here, so a slow speed stun shot is required.

Billiards Digest                                       2                                                  March 2025
                                   Image 3 Cut-induced throw (CIT) shot

    Throw is very important with frozen and small-gap combination shots. Image 4 shows an example. The
11 and 13 are frozen, pointing straight up-table. With a straight hit, the 13 goes very wide of the corner pocket.
However, with an angled hit, cutting the 11 to the left, we can throw the 13 to the left. The video includes many
more examples with the frozen balls lined up in different directions, and with the CB in different positions.
Understanding a little about throw can help you pocket a great variety of frozen or small-gap combo shots.

                                        Image 4 Frozen combo throw
Billiards Digest                                      3                                                 March 2025
     Throw can also be used to transfer spin to an OB to change the rebound angle on bank shots. Image 5
shows a good example where I need to bank the 8 straight back to the upper left corner pocket, but the 1 blocks
the natural bank path. With an aim away from the 1 instead, with stun, the CB can throw and transfer enough
right spin to the 8 to make it rebound back to the pocket, with plenty of clearance. As demonstrated in the
video, with slower speed stun and a cut close to a ½-ball hit, you can even get too much “twist” on the bank,
sending the 8 into the long rail off the short rail.

                                            Image 5 Spin-transfer bank

    Check out online video NV L.69 for much more information and other useful shot examples. Also check
out all the links in the YouTube video description to learn more about all principles and shot types covered.
Happy throwing!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV L.69 – Pool Made Simple – THROW SHOTS You Need to Know … with GoPro POV
   normal video

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                         4                                                 March 2025
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/top_10_draw_shot_tips.pdf
title: Top 10 Draw Shot Tips
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Top 10 Draw Shot Tips”                                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     I recently posted a new online video (NV J.33) that demonstrates my Top 10 Tips for improving your draw
shot technique. As I am sure most of you know, a draw shot is where you hit low on the cue ball (CB) to
impart bottom-spin to make the CB come back after hitting the object ball (OB). Many beginners, and even
some intermediate players, struggle with this important but sometimes-elusive skill. Below is a summary of
the ten tips of advice from the video.

1. Chalk Up

    The first important piece of advice is to chalk the tip properly. As demonstrated in the video, do not just
carelessly use your bridge hand to chalk. And do not drill a hole into the chalk. And do not rotate the chalk
around the tip. This dirties and damages the ferrule. These technique waste chalk, get chalk dust
everywhere, and get your bridge hand dirty. Instead, as demonstrated in the video and in Photo 1, hold the
cue at an angle so the tip is lower. Carefully apply chalk to the edges of the tip where it is needed, using a
swiping motion as you rotate the cue. And check the tip visually during and after chalking to make sure the tip
surface is covered completely.

                                       Photo 1 How to Chalk Properly

2. Aim Low and Carefully

     To get good draw, you must hit low on the CB. As shown in Photo 2, a standard striped ball can be used
to visualize how low you can go without miscuing. The tip contact point can be as low as the edge of the
stripe. Look how much you can lower the tip to apply backspin. The width of a standard ball stripe is half the
ball’s diameter, which corresponds to the size of the miscue limit circle. A good way to test if the stripe width
is the standard size is to freeze 3 balls in a triangle, as shown in Photo 3. If the stripe width is half the ball

Billiards Digest                                                                                       March, 2020
diameter, the stripe edges will align. Balls with large numbers in the stripe will usually have a stripe width
wider than the standard size, so be aware of this.

                         Photo 2 Using a "stripe” to visualize how low you can hit

                                 Photo 3 Checking for standard-width stripe

3. Warm-Up and Check

     It is very important to carefully check both the tip position and aim with the cue still and with the tip close
to the CB in your set position. Also return the tip close to the CB after each of your warm-up strokes so you
can easily verify accurate placement. It is also good practice to verify the tip contact point and aim again, with
the cue still, before your final stroke.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         March, 2020
     It helps to have a deliberate and consistent eye pattern during your pre-shot routine. As demonstrated in
the video, focus on the OB target as you bring your cue down into place. Check both the aim and tip contact
point with the cue still by slowly moving the eyes back and forth. Focus on the CB during the warm-up
strokes to make sure you do not hit the CB by mistake and to ensure the cue remains straight with the desired
tip contact point. Then again hold the cue still to re-verify the aim and tip contact point. Then lock your eyes
with laser focus on the OB target before the final stroke delivery. You do not need to do everything exactly
like these “best practices” recommendations; but regardless of what you do, be deliberate, careful, focused,
and consistent.

4. Keep Cue Level

     Make sure you do not elevate the back of the cue more than you need to. As shown in Photo 4, if you
lower and collapse your bridge hand and lengthen your bridge distance, it is much easier to get the cue more
level. You can get good draw with an elevated cue, assuming the CB doesn’t hop too much; but with the cue
more level, your draw shots will be more accurate and more effective. Despite what old-school books,
players, and instructors might say, an open bridge has many advantages over a closed bridge. And this
applies to draw shots too. For more information, see the “open vs. closed bridge” resource page under
“bridge” in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu.

              Photo 4 Using a longer bridge length and flatter bridge hand to get cue more level

5. Go Back Slow

     Be very careful to not rush your stroke. It does not help to pull the cue back fast. In fact, it can only hurt
by causing unwanted body motion that can push the cue off-line. Instead, pull the cue back slowly on your
final backstroke, and do not rush the transition between the back and forward strokes. For some people, it
helps to add a distinct and deliberate pause. If you do not pause, just be sure to be smooth with the back-to-
forward transition. If you have trouble with jerking and rushing the transition, it can be helpful to add a
deliberate pause. If you pause, there is no way you can jerk the transition.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        March, 2020
6. Accelerate Smoothly

    If your bridge length is short, not only is it difficult to get the tip low without elevating the back of the cue,
you also need to punch the stroke to get more speed. If you use a longer bridge length, you will have more
distance to accelerate smoothly to generate more speed. This will help make your stroke more accurate and
consistent.

    It is very important to not decelerate into the CB. This will reduce your draw effectiveness, and it will
wreak havoc on your speed control. People tend to decelerate into the CB when they are not fully committed
to or confident with the shot. Remember, go back slow, and accelerate smoothly into the CB.

     When you do not need as much draw distance, you can use a shorter stroke with the same low tip
position. If you have trouble using a shorter stroke with the same long bridge length, an option is to shorten
the bridge length to force the shorter stroke. One disadvantage of this approach is the back of the cue will
need to be elevated more to get the same low tip position. Another way to control draw amount is to vary the
tip height. Obviously, with a higher tip, you get less draw. Generally, a lower tip and slower speed will offer
more control, except with a controlled stun-back shot.

7. Keep Your Grip Relaxed

     It is very important to keep your grip relaxed during the entire stroke. If you tighten your grip during the
shot, the tip will hit the CB lower than you think. You also want to be careful to keep your wrist relaxed. If you
flex your wrist during the stroke, the cue will not stay on-line. You also do not want to have too much of a gap
or slop in your grip. If you tighten a sloppy grip by mistake, the cue really moves a lot. You also do not want
the grip tension. With an overly tight grip, you will not be able to have a relaxed and smoothly-accelerating
stroke.

    Even worse than tightening just your grip during the stroke is tightening your entire arm. If you do this,
the entire cue will lift during the stroke. If this happens during a draw shot with an open bridge, you will not
get much if any draw on the ball since the tip will hit the CB higher than expected. For somebody who has
trouble with this, a closed bridge can help counteract the stroke deficiency.

    As demonstrated in the video, when your grip is relaxed the cue should easily pivot in the grip hand
during the stroke. If your grip is too tight, the wrist will pivot back and forth, and it will be very difficult to stroke
smoothly, accurately, and consistently.

8. Be Still

    Another important tip, especially for draw shots, is to keep your head and body as still as possible during
and after the stroke. Do not lift up and turn your head to watch the OB. And do not lift your body up on the
shot either. Be a “relaxed statue” during and after the shot. If you do not lift your head or body after the shot,
there is no way you will do it by accident during the shot.

9. Do Not Drop Your Elbow

    Another key to cue-tip contact-point accuracy, especially with a draw shot, is to keep the elbow still during
the stroke into the ball. As demonstrated in the video, if you want to practice this you can have a friend lightly
place fingers around your elbow while you stroke back and forth. If you drop your elbow, it will be clear to
both you and your friend. Your friend can also hold your upper arm and shoulder while you stroke to remind
you that these should be still to keep the elbow from dropping. Another clue of a dropping elbow is banging
the cue into the rail. Again, keep your elbow still during the stroke into the ball to be accurate with the tip
contact point. If you drop your elbow, you will not hit the CB where you expect, and you will not get as much
or any draw.

Billiards Digest                                                                                              March, 2020
    It is OK to drop the elbow if you can drop it straight, and if you drop it mostly after the hit. However, one
problem with elbow drop for some people is that other bad things sometimes come with it, like wrist flex. Or
they also “chicken wing” the elbow out as the elbow goes down.

    Another important thing about the elbow is that it should be straight up, with the forearm perpendicular to
the cue. You should not have the elbow “chicken winged” out, and you should not have it tucked in before the
stroke. When the forearm is not in a vertical plane, the cue will usually not move in a straight line during the
stroke.

10. Finish the Stroke

     The final important attribute of a good draw shot is finishing the stroke and resisting the urge to pull back
prematurely. If you have trouble with this, you should practice staying down and still after the shot until the
CB comes back to the tip with a straight shot. You have plenty of time to get out of the way. One approach is
to just roll the cue sideways when necessary. Another approach is to just gradually move back when the CB
starts getting close.

     If you finish a draw stroke properly, the tip should finish down on the table; and with an open bridge, the
cue will often finish up above the bridge support. There is nothing wrong with cue lift since it doesn’t occur
until the CB is long gone. You do not need to force the follow through. If you accelerate into the ball and stay
relaxed, the follow through will happen naturally. Again, do not rush to get the cue out of the way. There is
plenty of time to finish the stroke first. Do not jerk the cue back.

     I hope the information in this article helps you improve your draw shot technique and effectiveness.
Everything described is demonstrated in online video NV J.33. Most of the advice in this video applies to all
types of shots … not just draw shots. Draw shots just require a lower tip position and usually more cue
speed. They are also much less forgiving and demand more accuracy than other type of shots. Be sure to
watch the video and practice the drills demonstrated and recommended. Only then can you really put the
information to use effectively.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.33 – Top 10 Secrets of a Good Draw/Backspin/Screw-Back Shot
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       March, 2020
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/top_10_reasons_for_missing.pdf
title: Top 10 Reasons For Missing
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Top 10 Reasons for Missing”                                                ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    When you miss pool shots, do you sometimes wonder why you missed? You should, because that’s how
we improve … by diagnosing mistakes and trying to prevent them in the future. Or do you want a bunch of
excuses you can use when you miss shots? Either way, this article for you. It summarizes a video I posted
recently (NV J.99) that covers the top 10 reasons people miss shots, along with things you can do to help
prevent the mistakes.

1. Lack of Focus
    Sometimes we just don’t focus, often by not using a consistent and purposeful pre-shot-routine. Instead,
plan the shot completely, aim carefully while standing, drop straight down into your stance, trust the aim when
you are down, use good stroke fundamentals, and stay down and still on the shot. Give every shot the
respect and focus it deserves, especially the “easy” shots, assuming you want to miss less and win more
games.

2. Poor Shot Choice
    Sometimes we make bad shot choices like using too much speed and rattling the pocket or deciding to
bank a ball when a cut has a much larger margin for error. Sometimes the bad choice is related to
equipment. For example, if a table might roll off due to non-levelness or dirty cloth or an unbalanced cue ball
(CB), you don’t want to slow-roll the ball. As with every topic in this article, online video NV J.99
demonstrates many interesting examples.

3. Bad Position
     Sometimes we miss because we got bad shape from the previous shot. You can dramatically improve
your CB control and reduce misses due to poor shape, or scratches, by knowing basic CB control principles
including the 90˚ rule tangent line, the 30˚ rule natural angle, and the draw-shot 3-times-the-angle system.
See online video NV J.27 if you want to learn more about these useful principles.

    Poor speed control can also lead to bad position and misses. Many players try to control shot speed
using a full stroke. Your speed control can be much better if you instead change the stroke length for different
shot speeds. This lets you us the same smoothly accelerating stroke style for every shot. It is just like putting
and chipping in golf. The length of the backstroke determines the ball travel distance.

     Another reason people sometimes play poor position is not leaving angles on shots or coming across the
line of the next shot. Image 1 shows a good example from the video. If you follow the CB off the side
cushion and go across the narrow part of the shape zone for the 8, there is a very small margin for error with
shot speed. But if you instead come into the line of the shot as shown, you get a good look at the 8 over a
wide range of shot speeds. Smart choices like this can help prevent many misses.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    February 2022
                                Image 1 Coming into the line of the shot

4. Bad Aim
    Often, we miss shots simply because we just aim wrong. Probably the most common cause for this is not
aiming properly while standing. Visualizing the shot and aiming carefully while standing is the best “aiming
system” there is (see Image 2).

                                     Image 2 Aiming while standing

    Sometime our aim is bad because we have poor or inconsistent visual alignment. It is very important to
find and know your personal “vision center” position. Only when your head is in this individually unique
position will you perceive the line of a shot correctly. Another aim-related cause for misses in not
compensating for cut-induced throw. As with every topic in this article, see the links in the YouTube video
description of NV J.99 if you want to learn more.

Billiards Digest                                                                                February 2022
5. Bad Stroke
     There are many common stroke issues that cause misses including tightening your grip during a shot,
rushing the backstroke or the transition to the forward stroke, and dropping your elbow during the stroke into
the CB. Instead, pull back slowly and accelerate forward smoothly while keeping your grip relaxed and your
shoulder and elbow still. Another common stroke flaw is moving the head and body during the shot. With
your head and body still, you will have much better and more consistent results. I like to tell students to be a
“relaxed statue” during and after the shot (see Image 3).

                                          Image 3 Relaxed statue

6. Poor Eye Pattern
     Sometimes people miss shots due to a poor eye pattern, which is what you do with your eyes as you aim
and prepare to shoot a shot. You want to be sure to intently focus on the things important to making the shot
like the object ball (OB) target as you drop down into your stance and the tip position and cue alignment,
slowly moving your eyes back and forth between the CB and OB with the cue still. Then lock your eyes on
the OB target with intense “laser” focus before the final stroke (see Image 4).

                                            Image 4 Laser focus

Billiards Digest                                                                                   February 2022
7. Elevated Cue
    Another common cause for misses is having the back of the cue elevated. With a hit even slightly off
center, the CB will swerve causing a miss. If you always keep the cue as level as possible, you will be much
less likely to miss shots.

8. Poor Sidespin Choices
     A big cause for misses is not compensating your aim properly when using sidespin. When you hit the CB
off center, it does not go straight. It squirts off to the side and the CB’s path swerves. The net effect of this is
called CB deflection, which varies with shot speed and distance and the amount and type of spin. This is a
common cause for misses when using sidespin, whether the sidespin is intentional or not. Also, some players
use sidespin when it is not required, which just adds unnecessary risk for missing. Sometimes they wrongly
think sidespin is needed to change CB direction off the OB, but this is simply wrong. Sidespin is usually
required only when you want to change the rebound angle off a cushion.

9. Mental Errors
    Sometimes, we miss shots due to mental errors. For example, if you have doubt when down on the shot
about your aim or whether you might scratch, the results can be bad. If you have any doubts, don’t just “Hit it
Anyway.” Instead, you should get up and restart your pre-shot routine to carefully plan the shot, aim while
standing, clear your mind, and execute with confidence.

    Another common mental error is focusing too much on shape for the next shot and not enough on
pocketing the ball. It does not help to get perfect shape if you miss the shot. Instead, always keep your focus
on pocketing the ball, trusting that your shot plan will give the desired CB position.

10. Other Reasons
    There are many other things that cause us to miss shots. They include having a sloppy or moving bridge,
not chalking the tip properly, excessive throw due to cling/skid/kick, poor eyesight with no vision correction
glasses or contacts, getting sharked by your opponent, faulty or poor-quality equipment, etc. You can always
come up with “excuses” for missing shots, but most of them are preventable.

     Be sure to check out online video NV J.99 to see demonstrations and examples of everything described
in this article. And see the links in the YouTube video description if you want to learn more about any of the
individual topics. And if you want to see proof that even pros miss on occasion, and sometimes badly and for
no apparent reason, watch the beginning of online video NV J.90, where you can see some classic and
shocking pro misses. Sometimes it can be consoling to see pros miss easy shots occasionally. It reminds us
they are human; and it makes us mere mortals feel less worse about some of our misses.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV J.27 – CUE BALL CONTROL … Everything You Need to Know
                   NV J.90 – Top 10 WILD and CRAZY POOL SHOTS of All Time
normal video       NV J.99 – Top 10 Reasons for Missing … and How to Prevent It

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       February 2022
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/top_10_reasons_to_use_an_open_bridge.pdf
title: Top 10 Reasons To Use An Open Bridge
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Top 10 Reasons to Use an Open Bridge”                                      ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     Do you use a closed bridge? And do you know that an open bridge offers many advantages? In the old
days of American pool, pretty much every player used a closed bridge. And that’s what early books and
instructors taught. And many players (and some instructors) still think a closed bridge is better for draw and
power shots, but this is simply not the case. Things have changed a lot over the years, with a definite trend
towards the open bridge. This was partly influenced by the snooker world, where pretty much every player
has always used an open bridge. Snooker players are the most accurate and consistent cueists in the world,
as necessitated by the large table and small pockets.

     In a recent online video (NV J.98), I demonstrate the Top 10 advantages of the open bridge, which
explain why it is used exclusively in snooker and with growing popularity in pool. Below is a summary from
the video. Some of the things not illustrated might be a little tough to visualize, so be sure to watch the video
if you want to see clear demonstrations of everything.

1. Easy to Learn
    First, an open bridge is very easy to learn and master, even for a beginner. As demonstrated in the
video, the simplest way to form one is to start with the hand flat, just make a first, and bend the thumb firmly
against your index finger. You can also raise and curl the thumb to create even more support for the cue. A
more common open bridge can be formed by again starting with a flat hand, raise the knuckles a little, and
place the thumb against the hand. Again, it can be improved by raising the thumb; and if you can curl your
thumb up (not everybody can do this), you can create a deep and stable “V” guide for the cue (see Image 1).
In pool, most things should be relaxed, but the bridge hand should be a little tense, with the fingers spread
and pressed into the cloth, and with the thumb held firmly against the index finger.

                                          Image 1 Open bridge “V”

Billiards Digest                                                                                      March, 2022
2. Stable
    An open bridge is also very stable, with a large “footprint.” A typical closed bridge has a much smaller
footprint (see Image 2). The larger footprint makes it easier to keep the open bridge solid and still during a
shot. It can be stable even with high tip positions since the heel of the hand can be kept on the table as the
knuckles are raised. A closed bridge is less stable as it is raised.

                             (a) open                                           (b) closed

                                          Image 2 Bridge “footprints”

3. Unobscured View
    One of the primary advantages of an open bridge is that it offers an unobscured view of the entire shaft,
especially when using a low stance, with the chin on the cue (see Image 3). This makes it easier to align the
cue accurately with the desired shot line. It is like looking down the barrel of a rifle. With a closed bridge, the
loop index finger blocks part of the shooter’s view of the shaft, making it a little more difficult to visualize cue
alignment. If you want to learn more about the advantages of a low stance and how to comfortably form one,
see the ”stance” FAQ page at billiards.colostate.edu.

                                      Image 3 Unobscured view of shaft

Billiards Digest                                                                                         March, 2022
4. Accurate “V” Guide
    Another advantage of an open bridge is it supports the cue in a simple and well-defined “V” shape that
provides a very accurate and consistent sliding guide. This is not always the case with a closed bridge,
where there are usually many more points of contact at odd angles. The “V” is also bony with very little flesh,
so an open bridge provides a stiffer and more solid support.

5. Centered
     If the “V” is facing you, as it should, the cue is guaranteed to stay centered in the bridge during the entire
stroke, even with a tapered cue. This is not always the case with a closed bridge. You do need to be careful
to orient your hand properly. If the bridge hand is turned too much CCW, your wrist will be bent, and the “V”
will not face you. This also causes the cue to rub on the fleshy part of the hand, which is not ideal. To orient
the “V” properly, many people need to turn their hand CW a little. This not only helps you square up the “V,” it
also allows the wrist to be straighter, which can be more comfortable.

6. Low Resistance
     An open bridge offers the least resistance to cue movement, especially under hot, humid, and dirty
conditions. A closed bridge has more fleshy contact with the shaft, resulting in more and less consistent
resistance. Any shaft taper also increases the resistance during the stroke. A shooting glove can help, but it
isn’t required with an open bridge (unless you play under hot, humid, and dirty conditions). The “V” of an
open bridge is usually bony with little flesh, so there is very little resistance. The low resistance is especially
helpful with-finesse shots.

7. Versatile
   An open bridge offers a greater range of bridge heights. It can be easily flattened to a low cue position,
and it can be raised higher when bridging over a ball. It is also easy to jack up when close to a cushion or to
execute a jump shot (see Image 4).

                                        Image 4 Elevated open bridge

8. More Reach
    An open bridge also makes it easier to reach extended shots, as an alternative to using a mechanical
bridge.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        March, 2022
9. Accurate Pivots
     An open bridge results in more accurate and consistent pivots than with a closed bridge. This is
important if you are using any pivot-based aiming system like CTE or if you are using back-hand english
(BHE) or the System for Aiming With Sidespin (SAWS). For more information on any of these topics, see the
links in the YouTube video description of NV J.98.

10. Reveals Stroke Flaws
    Finally, an open bridge reveals stroke flaws that can be hidden with a closed bridge, allowing you to
better diagnose and fix technique deficiencies. For example, if you have a bad habit of tightening up during a
stroke and raising the cue off your bridge, you might not get the result you want with an open bridge. A
closed bridge can help keep the cue down if you have this technique flaw. I like to call the closed-bridge loop
finger a “Band-Aid.” It might help cover up technique flaws, possibly improving tip contact point accuracy.
However, the Band-Aid might not always give you the result you want. Tensing up during the stroke is still a
problem, limiting stroke effectiveness. A much better solution than covering the flaw with a Band-Aid closed
bridge is to fix the technique issue. A relaxed and smoothly accelerating stroke with an open bridge can be
much more effective.

Minor Disadvantages
    An open bridge does have some minor disadvantages or limitations. First, as demonstrated in the video,
an open bridge does not work well with some draw shots close to and along a rail. A closed bridge is required
to secure the cue. Also, some people don't like the cue leaving their open bridge hand after a draw shot with
a relaxed and complete follow through. However, the CB is long gone before this happens, and it has
absolutely no effect on the shot.

    If you have never given an open bridge a serious look before, you should consider it. It has many
advantages to offer, and it has no real disadvantages except in certain situations. Again, be sure to watch
online video NV J.98 so you can see everything in the article brought to life.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.98 – Top 10 Reasons to Use an OPEN BRIDGE
normal video

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       March, 2022
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/top_10_series_part_1_shots_you_must_know.pdf
title: Top 10 Series Part 1 Shots You Must Know
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Top 10 Series – Part 1: Shots You Must Know”                                    ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference
numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the first article in a series dealing with a “Top 10” video series I recently posted on YouTube. The
clips can be accessed at billiards.colostate.edu via online videos NV J.10 through NV J.15. This month, I
will cover the shots and principles from the first video: “Top 10 Pool Shots Every Player Must Know!!!” The
video covers the following categories along with examples of game-situation shots that demonstrate every
technique and principle. Any player wishing to improve and excel must learn to master shots in each of these
ten categories.

1.) Accurate/Consistent/Reliable/Controlled Stun/Follow/Draw
     A critically important skill in all cue sports is the ability to control the cue ball (CB) accurately, consistently,
and reliably. You must master the ability to hit stun, follow, and draw shots over a range of distances and
speeds. I have written numerous articles about this topic over the years, and Diagram 1 provides a good
summary of the important principles. The 90º rule predicts that when the CB hits the object ball (OB) with
stun (no top or bottom spin), the CB heads in the “tangent line” direction perpendicular to OB direction. The
30º rule peace sign allows you to predict CB direction when the CB is rolling into the OB over a wide range of
cut angles. And the “3-times-the-angle” or “trisect” system predicts that the total angle between the initial and
final CB directions for a “good action” draw shot is three times the cut angle. These CB references can be
very helpful, as demonstrated in the video.

                                      Diagram 1 CB control reference lines

Billiards Digest                                                                                           February, 2019
2.) English shots
     Using english (sidespin) is critical in advanced position play. It is important to know when and how to use
right, left, running, reverse, outside, and inside sidespin. The terminology is illustrated in Diagram 2, and
game-situation shot examples for each type of sidespin are demonstrated in the video. Many of the shot
examples were taken from the “Billiard University English Examples” document available in the “english” FAQ
page at billiards.colostate.edu. We use these examples in our annual BU Summer School Boot Camps,
where we teach an effective system for aiming using sidespin (which I will cover in a future article). The first
two pages of the document are shown in Diagram 3.

                                  Diagram 2 English (sidespin) terminology

3.) Rail cut shots
    Rail cut shots, where the OB is frozen to a cushion, require special care. First of all, with stun shots, be
sure to aim to hit the cushion first to prevent throw into the cushion. To have sidespin take on the cushion
after the hit, you need to hit the ball first, or hit the ball while the cushion is still compressing. If you hit the
cushion first with sidespin, the sidespin will not be effective. When the angle into the rail is steep, you can hit
the cushion first with running sidespin to make the shot much easier. All of these techniques are
demonstrated in the video.

4.) Throw shots
     When you cut an OB or use sidespin, the OB can be thrown offline due to sideways friction between the
balls. It is important to know how to adjust your aim for throw when necessary. It is also important to know
how to use throw to your benefit when possible. In the video, I demonstrate how to use throw to help hold the
CB, how I adjust aim for throw, and how to use spin to throw a ball in or “twist” a straight-back bank.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       February, 2019
                   Diagram 3 BU Summer School Boot Camp game-situation english examples

5.) Drag shots
   A drag shot is where you hit the CB below center to have the CB slow down and lose backspin on the
way to the OB. As demonstrated in the video, a drag shot can be used to:

          1. Limit table roll-off.

          2. Help hold the CB.

          3. Intensify sidespin to help throw a ball in.

          4. Intensify sidespin to increase the rebound angle change off a cushion.

6.) Carom/kiss shots
    Sometimes, the only option is to carom the CB off an OB or kiss an OB off another. As demonstrated in
the video, it is easy to aim and predict CB direction for tangent-line and natural caroms or kisses. Diagram 4
shows an interesting bank-kiss shot demonstrated in the video. Playing stripes with only the 11 remaining, all
pockets are blocked for reasonable shots. It would also be very difficult to play an effective safety in this
situation. A good option here is to bank the 11 straight back with a stop shot and get the natural angle kiss off
the CB.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    February, 2019
                                          Diagram 4 Bank kiss example

7.) Kick shots
     Kick shots are very important in replying to safeties, and for some offensive shots. In the video, the
following useful and common aiming systems are demonstrated:

          1. Contact-point mirror kick.

          2. Visual equal-distance mirror kick.

          3. Midpoint parallel-shift two rail kick in and out of a corner.

          4. Multiple-rail Plus System kick off a short rail

          5. Multiple-rail Corner Five System kick off a long rail.

As with all topics covered in the video, detailed descriptions, illustrations, and demonstrations of the systems
are available via links in the YouTube video description.

8.) Bank shots
    Bank shots are extremely important offensive weapons when you need them. As demonstrated in the
video, you should know how to aim:

          1. Slow-roll 2-to-1 banks.

          2. Fast-speed 1/3-more-than-twice banks.

You should know how to adjust for and use spin-transfer to your benefit.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   February, 2019
9.) Jump shots
     The jump shot is an extremely important offensive weapon in modern pool. As demonstrated in the
video, you should be comfortable jumping over the edge of a ball with a regular cue and jumping over a full
ball with a jump cue. You should also be able to control the CB with jumps, both with the “dart stroke” and
with a regular stroke.

10.) Massé shots
   Finally, when a kick or jump is not a good option, it is important to be able to curve the CB, either with a
small swerve shot or using the Coriolis aiming system for a massé shot.

     Again, all of the techniques and principles demonstrated in the video are documented in detail on the
resource pages linked in the YouTube video description. If you want more information, just click on these
links to access illustrations, detailed video demonstration, and pertinent instructional articles.

    I hope you enjoy my “Top 10” video and article series. Be sure to watch the videos. Better yet, after
watching, try everything out at the table to diagnose and improve your skills.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.10 – Top 10 Pool Shots Every Player Must Know!!!
                    NV J.13 – Top 10 Things Pool Players Do Wrong … and How to Fix Them
normal video        NV J.14 – Top 10 Pool Shots Amateurs Play Wrong … and How to Play Them Right
                    NV J.15 – Top 10 Pool Strategy Errors Amateurs Make … and How to Prevent Them

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     February, 2019
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/top_10_series_part_2_things_players_do_wrong.pdf
title: Top 10 Series Part 2 Things Players Do Wrong
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Top 10 Series – Part 2: Things Players Do Wrong”                            ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference
numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the second article in a series dealing with a “Top 10” video series I recently posted on YouTube.
The clips can be accessed at billiards.colostate.edu via online videos NV J.10, NV J.13, NV J.14 and NV
J.15. This month, I will cover the shots and principles from the second video: “Things Pool Players Do
Wrong … and How to Fix Them.” The video covers the following categories of technique elements with
which many amateurs have trouble. Any player wishing to improve and excel must have solid fundamentals
in these areas.

1.) Cue Elevation
    One thing pool players do wrong is not keep the cue as level as possible. You don’t want the back of the
cue elevated more than if necessary to clear the rails. To get the cue more level, you can lower your elbow or
bring your whole stance down. As demonstrated in the video, the problem with having the cue elevated is if
you hit the cue ball (CB) slightly off center (intentional or not), the CB will not go straight due to swerve. With
a level cue, the CB will go much straighter with an off-center hit.

2.) Sloppy Bridge
    Some people have sloppy closed bridges that are not stable side to side, have gaps between the cue and
fingers, or are too tight, creating too much friction. An open bridge has many advantages. It can be more
stable, it provides a very accurate guide for the cue, and it has very little friction. Some people also have
sloppy rail bridges, where the cue is not guided very well. As demonstrated in the video, the best way to form
a rail bridge is to guide the cue with the thumb, middle finger, and index finger.

3.) High Stance
     Some people stand with their head too high. This can make it difficult to see both the CB and object ball
(OB) without moving the head or eyes a lot. With the head close to the cue, it is much easier to see the line
of the shot, the tip contact point on the CB, and the OB target without having to move the head. An open
bridge also provides full view of the entire length of the shaft to help with visual alignment. You can get your
head lower by bending at the waist, bending the knees, and/or separating the feet. For me, being tall, I use
significant knee bend. This is much easier and more comfortable than bending at the waist, which can cause
hamstring, back, and neck discomfort.

4.) Poor Alignment and Aim
    Many pool players have poor visual alignment and aim. Accurate and consistent visual alignment is the
most important fundamental of pool! With your eyes in the right place relative to the cue, you can visualize
the line of the shot and cue alignment correctly. Everybody has a unique head position that works best. For
many people, like me, it is with the cue centered between the eyes. For others, it might be with the cue under
an eye or somewhere in between the eyes. I call an individual’s ideal head position the personal “vision
center.”

     Diagram 1 shows a good stop-shot drill you can use to test your visual alignment and straight-shot aim.
The goal is to pocket the 1 and stop the CB in place. If your aim is not true, the CB might go to your left or
right. If you hit too low or with too much speed, the CB might draw back slightly. And if you hit too high or
Billiards Digest                                                                                        March, 2019
with too little speed, the CB might follow slightly. If your tip is not centered on the CB, you will get sidespin. It
can be more difficult to visualize the center of the CB when your eyes are not aligned properly. However, if
your “vision center” is properly aligned, if your tip position is centered, and if your aim is good, the CB should
stop in place. If your head is too far to your left, the CB will usually go to the right, even when the shot looks
straight to you. And if your head is too far to your right, the CB will usually go to the left, even when the shot
looks straight.

                                         Diagram 1 Vision center drill

    In addition to having good visual alignment, you should also keep your face as square to the shot as
possible, with your eyes as level as possible. Don’t turn or tilt your head away from the shot. With everything
aligned and square, you will be much more effective aiming shots consistently. For more information on
these topics, see the “vision” FAQ page at billiards.colostate.edu.

5.) Cue and Eye Motion
     While checking your alignment and aim in your stance, don’t move your cue and eyes too much. Instead,
verify the tip position and alignment with the cue still. And give your eyes time to focus on both the CB and
the OB target. Before the final stroke, lock your eyes on the OB target and keep them very still before and
during the shot.

6.) No Pre-Shot Routine
     One thing many pool players do wrong is not have a consistent and purposeful pre-shot routine. They
just get down on the shot and do most of their aiming and thinking while down. Instead, you should think
about and visualize the shot and desired CB motion first. Also, make sure the tip is chalked properly. Then
aim and align while standing, where you have the best perspective on the shot. Then lock your vision center
along the shot line and drop straight down. And then focus only on delivering a straight stroke with the

Billiards Digest                                                                                          March, 2019
desired tip contact point, at the desired speed. You should not be thinking or making decisions while you are
down on the shot.

7.) Sidespin
    Some beginners decide to add sidespin to a shot when it is not necessary. Diagram 2 shows an
example where the 8 ball shot is straight and we need to get down table for a shot at the 9 next. Some
people might wrongly think you need left spin here to make the CB go to the left. This will happen only if you
send the 8-ball to the shooter’s right of pocket center (see the blue shot). If the 8-ball is instead sent to the
other side of pocket center, the CB will actually drift to the shooter’s right (see the red shot). And if you send
the 8 into the center of the pocket, the CB will spin in place. A good way to play this shot is to just “cheat the
pocket” with no sidespin at all (see the solid white and black ball paths). Other options demonstrated in the
video are to follow forward with left spin, or draw back with right spin.

                                         Diagram 2 Sidespin effects

    Sidespin is used to change the angle the CB rebounds off a cushion. Sometimes you are forced to use
sidespin because natural CB paths are blocked. Left spin makes the CB rebound more to the left, and right
spin makes it rebound more to the right.

8.) Tight Grip
    A very common pool mistake is tightening your grip during the stroke. When you do this, it causes the tip
to move down. As demonstrated in the video, that can cause you to miscue and scoop under draw shots.
Keep your grip relaxed during the entire stroke if you want the tip to hit the CB where you are aiming. To help
ensure your grip is relaxed during practice, you can wiggle your grip fingers before and after the shot, as
demonstrated in the video.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       March, 2019
9.) Bad Stroke
     There are many things people do wrong with their stroke. One thing is jerking the transition between the
back and forward stroke, during both the warm-up strokes, and during the final stroke. When you jerk the cue
forward, the stroke will usually also involve unwanted body motion. Instead, bring the cue back slowly, pause
slightly, and then accelerate forward smoothly. You don’t need a deliberate pause before the forward stroke
… just don’t rush the transition.

     Another common mistake is moving the shoulder and dropping the elbow. One problem with this is the
tip will rise up causing you to hit the CB higher than expected. You will also sometimes clang the cue into the
rail. If you keep the shoulder and elbow still during the stroke, you will likely be much more accurate and
consistent. Now, if you can drop your elbow perfectly straight and the same amount each time, it is not a
proble; but most people don’t do this. Many people typically “chicken wing” their elbow out when it drops.
This is not good for accuracy or consistency.

10.) Head and Body Motion
     Another common stroke flaw is moving the head or body during the shot. You should keep your eyes,
head, and body still during and after the shot. Don’t watch where the ball goes. And don’t jump up on the
shot. And don’t use “body English” or swoop the stroke sideways. Instead, as demonstrated it the video, be
a “relaxed statue” during and after the shot.

    If you want to diagnose and fix some flaws in your fundamentals, check out the “best practices” check list
on my website. The link is in the YouTube video description along with links to resource pages providing
additional information and demonstrations related to every topic in the video.

    I hope you are enjoying my “Top 10” video and article series. Be sure to watch the videos. Better yet,
after watching, try everything out at the table to diagnose and improve your skills.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.10 – Top 10 Pool Shots Every Player Must Know!!!
                    NV J.13 – Top 10 Things Pool Players Do Wrong … and How to Fix Them
normal video        NV J.14 – Top 10 Pool Shots Amateurs Play Wrong … and How to Play Them Right
                    NV J.15 – Top 10 Pool Strategy Errors Amateurs Make … and How to Prevent Them

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       March, 2019
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/top_10_series_part_3_shots_played_wrong.pdf
title: Top 10 Series Part 3 Shots Played Wrong
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Top 10 Series – Part 3: Shots Played Wrong”                                ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference
numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the third article in a series dealing with a “Top 10” video series I recently posted on YouTube. The
clips can be accessed via online videos NV J.10, NV J.13, NV J.14 and NV J.15. This month, I will cover the
shots and principles from the third video: “Pool Shots Amateurs Play Wrong … and How to Play Them
Right.” The video covers the categories of shot and technique elements below with which many amateurs
have trouble. Any player wishing to improve and excel must have solid understanding and abilities in these
areas.

1.) Don’t Scratch
    Careless amateurs scratch often. If you know basic cue ball (CB) control principles, you should never
scratch, or even doubt if a scratch is possible or not. The natural angle for rolling-CB shots, as predicted by
the 30º rule peace sign, the tangent line for stun shots, as predicted by the 90º rule, and the 3-times-the-angle
direction for good-action draw shots are very easy to visualize and there is no excuse for not knowing exactly
where the CB will head on a shot. For more information about these systems, see the links in the YouTube
video description. Online video NV J.14 also contains numerous examples of how all of these principles are
applied.

     Pocket hangers also cause problems for some amateurs. Sometimes they aim straight and try to slow roll
it, with the CB following the object ball (OB) into pocket. Sometimes they try to hit a stop or draw shot with
the same bad result. Sometimes a good play is to just cheat the pocket to either side, possibly going rail first.
Stop and draw shots are also options. Again, NV J.14 shows a range of good game-situation examples.

2.) Make Pockets Play Bigger
     Have you ever seen amateurs rattle a ball in a pocket because they used more speed than they needed
for the shot? As demonstrated in NV J.14, the effective size of a pocket, especially a corner pocket, is much
larger at slower speed. Your stroke is also usually more accurate at slower speed. If you need to use fast
speed into a corner pocket, aim as carefully as you can into the heart of the pocket and don’t risk hitting the
near point, which can easily cause the ball to rattle. Instead, aim closer to the opposite facing to give yourself
a better chance to pocket the ball. The same advice applies to side pocket shots also. It is best to target the
far wall of the pocket with slow speed.

3.) Use the Rails as Brakes
     Have you ever seen amateurs come up short or go long when trying to finesse shape to get a look at the
next shot like the 8 ball in Diagram 1? Here, a much better play is to come off the rail. The cushion kills the
CB speed some and gives you a much larger margin for error with speed. Using the cushions as brakes like
this is a powerful technique, and is a better option than trying to finesse the shot.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         April, 2019
                                     Diagram 1 Using the rail as a brake

4.) Master the Table Center
     One thing amateurs often underappreciate is the power of controlling the CB to go to and through the
center of the table. It is good to practice this skill and it helps to know the 45º rule illustrated in Diagram 2.
The rule states that if the CB heads into the end rail at 45º, it will head toward the center of the table. If the
CB comes into the end rail at a more-shallow angle, it comes up short of the center. And if the CB comes into
the end rail at a steeper angle, it goes long of the center. Again, NV J.14 shows a range of good game-
situation examples where sending the CB to or through the table center is the right play and where the 45º
rule is used to plan the shot.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         April, 2019
                                               Diagram 2 45º rule

5.) Control Rail Cut Shots
     Have you ever seen amateurs play poor shape when cutting a ball close to a rail? An important principle
for shots like this is that with the right amount of draw and outside spin, you should be able to bring the CB
back along the line of the shot from any angle. Other options are to hit a stun shot for reliable tangent-line
motion, or to use close to maximum draw and rely on the 3-times-the-angle system, which means the CB will
come off the rail at twice the incoming angle. It is also sometimes important to be able to use inside follow to
go forward and use spin-intensifying drag. For more information on all of these approaches, see the
examples in the video and the links in the YouTube video description.

6.) Avoid Banks Unless Very Easy
     Have you ever seen amateurs attempt a bank shot where a thin cut is an option? A thin cut is almost
always more reliable than a bank. You can hit it a little full or thin and still pocket the ball. Now, where the cut
is almost impossible but a cross-side or cross-corner bank is fairly straight, the bank can be the right play.

7.) Elevate Smartly
     Have you ever seen amateurs elevate the butt of the cue way more than they need to? The problem with
this is if you do not hit the CB exactly on the vertical centerline, the CB will curve slightly causing you to miss.
You should always have the cue as level as possible to minimize possible swerve effects. Now, sometimes
you need to elevate the cue to clear over an obstacle ball. For shots like these, it is good practice to verify
your aim in the level position, keep you “vision center” over the cue as you elevate, and elevate only as much
as you need to clear the obstacle ball. Also, as always, keep your head, body, and elbow as still as possible
during the shot. The same technique should be used for jump shots, which also require an elevated cue.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          April, 2019
8.) Break Out Smartly
   Have you ever seen amateurs break out clusters with too much speed? When breaking out clusters, you
should use as little speed as possible to get a predictable, controlled and desirable outcome. You want to
know where the CB and OBs will end up, and you want them to be situated so you can complete the runout.

9.) Don’t Dribble the Rail
    Have you ever seen an amateur attempt to use topspin with an OB close to a rail as shown in Diagram 3,
where the goal is to follow off the end rail to go up table for the 8? With a full hit, and when the OB is this
close to the rail, the topspin does not have enough distance to accelerate the CB, and the topspin remaining
on the CB after rebound makes it follow back to the rail (see the blue CB path). I call this “rail dribble.” If the
OB were farther away from the cushion, the shot would work fine, as demonstrated in NV J.14. A better
option in a situation like this is to just thin the ball, as shown with the white CB path. However, depending on
the size of the pocket and how deep the ball is in the pocket, the pocket point might be problematic.

                                            Diagram 3 Rail dribble

10.) Detect and Avoid Double Hits
     Have you ever seen amateurs be clueless about knowing whether a close-range straight shot is a double-
hit foul or not? With a single hit, the CB will stop with a stop shot, delay slightly before going forward with a
follow shot, and not go forward at all with a draw shot. When the CB is frozen to the OB, you are allowed to
hit into the CB since it involves no push or double hit, even though it might feel otherwise. All of these shot
types are demonstrated in NV J.14.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         April, 2019
     I hope you are enjoying my “Top 10” video and article series. As always, the video description in
YouTube contains links to resource pages that provide additional information and demonstrations related to
every topic in the video. Be sure to watch the video and check out the resources. Better yet, after watching,
try everything out at the table to diagnose your weaknesses and improve your skills.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.10 – Top 10 Pool Shots Every Player Must Know!!!
                    NV J.13 – Top 10 Things Pool Players Do Wrong … and How to Fix Them
normal video        NV J.14 – Top 10 Pool Shots Amateurs Play Wrong … and How to Play Them Right
                    NV J.15 – Top 10 Pool Strategy Errors Amateurs Make … and How to Prevent Them

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        April, 2019
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/top_10_series_part_4_strategy_errors.pdf
title: Top 10 Series Part 4 Strategy Errors
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Top 10 Series – Part 4: Strategy Errors”                                   ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference
numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    This is the fourth and final article in a series dealing with a “Top 10” video collection I recently posted on
YouTube. The clips can be accessed via online videos NV J.10, NV J.13, NV J.14 and NV J.15. This month,
I will cover topics from the last video: “Top 10 Pool Strategy Errors Amateurs Make … and How to
Prevent Them.” The video demonstrates many strategy principles that amateurs often fail to consider when
selecting, planning, and executing shots. Any player wishing to improve and excel must understand and be
able to apply these principles in their game.

1.) Leave the Correct Angles
     Sometimes amateurs don’t leave angles on shots. If you leave a shot straight in, the only option is to
stop, follow forward, or draw back, which limits cue ball (CB) control options for the next shot. NV J.15 shows
several game situation examples where leaving angles on shots makes run-outs easy, and where getting
straight on a shot can make a run-out extremely difficult. When leaving angles, you also want to make sure
you end up on the correct side of the ball. Again, NV J.15 shows examples of what happens when you leave
the wrong angle.

2.) Come Into, Not Across, the Shape Zone
      The shape zone is the area where you can leave the CB and have a good shot. In Diagram 1, anywhere
in the area surrounded by the black curve would leave a good shot at the 8. When playing for position, it is
best to not come across the narrow part of a shape zone as shown with the yellow-line draw shot. The
margin for error with speed is very small. If you come up a little short or go a little long, you can leave a
difficult shot on the 8. When possible, always try to come into the line of the next shot, where you will end up
in the heart of the shape zone over a wide range of speeds as shown by the white-line follow shot and the
blue-line outside draw shot. With either of these approaches, the CB can go long or come up well short and
still leave a good shot at the 8. Again, NV J.15 demonstrates all of these shots along with good and bad
outcomes.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         May, 2019
                   Diagram 1 Come into the line of a shot, not across the shape zone

3.) Solve Problems Early
     Do you ever see amateurs pocket easy balls first and then wonder how they will deal with a problem
cluster later? You always want to solve your problems as early as possible. As demonstrated in NV J.15,
you should always use controlled speed when breaking out a cluster so you can better predict where all of the
balls will end up. This will help prevent you from getting into trouble. It is also important to have an
“insurance ball” that will guarantee and easy shot after the break out.

4.) Identify Key Balls
    See Diagram 2. An amateur might be tempted to shoot the 10 first since it is straight-in and easy.
However, because the 8 is difficult to get on later, the 10 is a good “key ball” to save. Here, a much better
plan is to start with the also-easy 15. A stop shot leaves a perfect angle to come off the 13 to get perfect
shape on the 10 to leave an easy shot at the 8. Always wisely choose the “key ball” to get on the 8, and also
choose the best “key ball” to help you get to the final “key ball.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                    May, 2019
                                  Diagram 2 Choose your key ball wisely

5.) Follow for the Dough
    With ball-in-hand, amateurs sometimes choose a shot that requires precise draw to get to the next shot.
In general this is a poor choice. Whenever possible, you should always try to roll the CB into position for the
next shot, using a follow shot, either straight or at an angle, even if the shot and CB travel distance might be
longer. It is much easier to control CB direction and travel distance with a follow shot as compared to a draw
shot. Remember, “Draw for Show … Follow for Dough.” Draw shots look cool when they work, but follow
shots are much easier to execute reliably.

6.) Use Ball-In-Hand Wisely
    Ever see amateurs shoot at the easiest ball on the table when they have ball in hand, and don’t plan or
play for shape? Then they wonder what to do next? Ball in hand is an ideal opportunity to solve any
problems like a cluster. Again, NV J.15 demonstrates some good examples.

7.) Take What’s Offered
    Sometimes people try too hard to get perfect shape on the next shot. The result might be great if you
play perfect position, but if you snooker yourself by coming up a little short or long, not many people will be
impressed. Sometimes it is better to just take what is offered by minimizing CB motion and accepting a
longer or tougher shot on the next ball to guarantee that nothing can go wrong. That’s often a better option
than trying to get fancy.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       May, 2019
8.) Don’t Bump Balls
    Ever see an amateur bump into a ball for no reason and send that ball into a bad place? Sometimes a
small bump can tie up a ball or block a pocket. In general, it is best to not bump any balls if there is no reason
to do so. This will prevent unforeseen problems and make thing much more predictable. Also, minimizing CB
motion can help make run-outs more controlled and reliable.

9.) Be Smart With Hangers
    Sometimes when amateurs have a hanger for their next shot, they don’t think they need to play good
position. But from distance or from a wrong angle, even a hanger can present a difficult CB control problem.
Getting closer to a hanger always makes the next position play easier. And NV J.15 demonstrates how
leaving the right angle can turn a challenging situation into a trivial out.

10.) Play the Percentages
    Ever see an amateur go for a tough shot and sell out the game? Always weigh your options and play the
percentages, and choose an easy safety over a tough shot if it will increase your chances for winning the
game. Smart play is what separates the hacks from the masters.

     I hope you enjoyed my “Top 10” video and article series. As always, the video descriptions in YouTube
contain links to resource pages that provide additional information and demonstrations related to every topic
in the videos. Be sure to watch the videos and check out the resources. Better yet, after watching, try
everything out at the table to diagnose your weaknesses and improve your skills.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV J.10 – Top 10 Pool Shots Every Player Must Know!!!
                    NV J.13 – Top 10 Things Pool Players Do Wrong … and How to Fix Them
normal video        NV J.14 – Top 10 Pool Shots Amateurs Play Wrong … and How to Play Them Right
                    NV J.15 – Top 10 Pool Strategy Errors Amateurs Make … and How to Prevent Them

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         May, 2019
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/toward_a_competitive_pool_playing_robot.pdf
title: C O V E R F E AT U R E Toward a
topics: collisions_and_impacts, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills, robotics_and_computation
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
C O V E R F E AT U R E

       Toward a
       Competitive
       Pool-Playing Robot
     Michael Greenspan, Joseph Lam, Marc Godard, Imran Zaidi,
     and Sam Jordan, Queen’s University
     Will Leckie, Nortel
     Ken Anderson, Larus Technologies
     Donna Dupuis, University of British Columbia

     Deep Green is a vision-based, intelligent robotic system that currently shoots pool at a
     better-than-amateur level, with the ultimate goal of challenging a proficient human
     opponent at a championship level.

     F
                rom behind a closed door in a university cam-                              developed a number of pool-playing robotic systems4-6 as
                pus hallway comes the distinctive clacking                                 well as a training system that has a computer vision com-
                sound of a pool game in progress. This isn’t a                             ponent but doesn’t involve robotic actuation.7,8
                student lounge, but rather a laboratory where
                we’re developing a vision-based, intelligent                               Deep Green
     robotic system to play competitive pool. Named Deep                                      As Figure 1 shows, Deep Green is centered on a
     Green, the system currently shoots at a better-than-ama-                              3-degree-of-freedom (DOF) industrial gantry robot,
     teur level, and our goal is to advance the system to be able                          which is mounted to the ceiling to avoid impeding human
     to challenge a proficient human opponent, ultimately at                               access to the table. A digital camera, the global vision
     a championship level.                                                                 system (GVS), is attached to the ceiling aiming down
       Pool—by which we loosely refer to all cue sports,                                   toward the table, accompanied by an array of directional
     including billiards, carom, and snooker—is somewhat                                   lights. Attached to the gantry’s vertical post is a 3-DOF
     misunderstood, more likely to evoke images of shifty                                  spherical robotic wrist that, combined with the gantry’s
     characters in smoky bars than advanced robotics. It                                   linear motion, affords the robot complete reachability
     evolved in the royal courts of medieval Europe as an                                  over the workspace.
     indoor version of croquet. Today, pool is enjoying a                                     The end-effector, illustrated in Figure 2, includes two
     resurgence of popularity worldwide. Variations are                                    distinct cue devices, one based on a linear electromag-
     played in almost every country, and pool was recognized                               netic motor and the other actuated pneumatically. The
     as a demonstration sport in the 1998 Nagano Olym-                                     electromagnetic cue can be finely controlled to strike up
     pics. According to a 2005 survey,1 more than 35 million                               to a velocity of 3 meters per second, which is sufficient for
     people played pool that year in the US alone, and pool                                normal play, whereas the pneumatic cue is used solely for
     ranked as the eighth most popular participation sport,                                power breaks and strikes at 12 m/s. A small eye-in-hand
     just after cycling and fishing.                                                       camera, the local vision system (LVS), is also attached to
       The first attempt to automate pool was the Snooker                                  the end-effector, as is a pick-and-place vacuum tool for
     Machine developed at the University of Bristol in the late                            ball-in-hand conditions and automatic racking.
     1980s,2 which culminated with a televised game on BBC’s                                  The table itself is a standard 4-foot × 8-foot coin-oper-
     science program QED. 3 Since then, researchers have                                   ated pool table, and all devices are connected to a single

46   Computer                                          Published by the IEEE Computer Society                                              0018-9162/08/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE

            Authorized licensed use limited to: Queens University. Downloaded on October 28, 2008 at 09:16 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
PC. While the system has been designed to play
the popular game of 8 Ball, with slight modifica-
tions it could play any other variation of pool.
Figure 3 shows a number of example shots.

ROBOTICS
  Rather than build our own hardware, we
based Deep Green on standard commercially
available, albeit customized, components. This
makes the system relatively inexpensive and
quick to deploy, and it allowed us to focus our
effort on the computational challenges.

Camera calibration
   The system’s robotic aspects rely primarily on
computer vision. Before using the cameras, we
had to calibrate them so that they could accu-
rately determine the ball locations within the Figure 1. Deep Green robotic pool-playing system. The system is centered
table’s metric coordinate reference frame. Using on a 3-degree-of-freedom gantry robot mounted to the ceiling to avoid
standard techniques, we determined the cam- impeding human access to the table.
eras’ intrinsic parameters, including factors to
correct for the radial distortion inherent to optical sys-
tems. It was also necessary to rectify the table plane to
compensate for perspective distortions that result from
the GVS retinal plane not being aligned exactly parallel
to the table surface, which is difficult to achieve manu-
ally to the desired accuracy.
   The retinal plane and the table are related by a trans-
formation known as a homography, a mapping between
two planes. The standard technique for determining a
homography involves extracting a minimum of four cor-
responding point locations between a planar pattern and
its image. This technique is awkward to apply in Deep
Green as the pattern must be large (the table’s size) as
well as very flat and accurate.                            Figure 2. End-effector components.
   Alternatively, we exploit an invariant property of the
projective space that uses a simple target comprising         Because this filter passes significant noise, the system
perpendicular lines, such as a large carpenter’s square. applies a connected-components algorithm and only
This technique lets us integrate measurements taken at admits those regions large enough to be valid balls. It
various positions on the table into a single homography, then processes these ball regions using circle-extraction
which we estimate up to an affinity. With a few addi- and best-fit routines, leading to an accurate estimate of
tional simple measurements, we can then recover the each ball’s center location.
remaining rotation and scale parameters that map the          Once Deep Green has accurately identified the ball
image pixels to metric locations on the table surface.     locations, it sends the circular subregions defining each
                                                           ball to a color-indexing routine to determine the ball
Ball localization and identification                       identities. It must know the exact identity (number) of
   At runtime, Deep Green acquires a GVS image when each ball, as the formal rules for 8 Ball require nominat-
the balls come to rest and unwarps it to remove the radial ing a ball and pocket for each shot. Offline, the system
and perspective distortions. It then compares this image forms a 2D histogram in normalized RGB space for each
with a set of statistics—pixel means and variances— of the 16 ball types from a collection of images of each
acquired from a set of approximately 30 background ball, taken at different aspects and at various locations
images of the table, without any balls present. For each on the table. At runtime, it compares the color space his-
pixel, if the difference between the foreground and back- togram of each ball region with this database and uses a
ground pixel values exceeds some threshold value of the histogram similarity metric to classify the ball.
background standard deviation, the system judges that         Despite strong similarities between the colors of differ-
pixel to be foreground, that is, possibly a ball.          ent ball types, and reuse of colors among the stripes and

                                                                                                                                             January 2008 47

      Authorized licensed use limited to: Queens University. Downloaded on October 28, 2008 at 09:16 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
                 C O V E R F E AT U R E

         (a)                                                                                    (b)

         (c)                                                                                    (d)

     Figure 3. Example shots. (a) 9 ball in the side pocket—composite of three images. (b) Combination shot: 4 ball in the corner pocket,
     off of the 7 ball—composite of four images. (c) Combination shot: 6 ball in the corner pocket, off of the 1 ball—composite of four
     images. (d) 5 ball in the corner pocket—time-exposure image.

     solids, the color-indexing method can reliably determine                                 error from the order of centimeters to within 0.6 mm on
     each ball’s identity. Once the system has accurately local-                              average, with a standard deviation of 0.3 mm.
     ized and identified each ball, it can simulate the table
     state for shot planning.                                                                 Eye-in-hand visual servoing
                                                                                                 While robot calibration rendered an improvement, a
     Robot calibration                                                                        positioning accuracy of 0.6 mm is insufficient to success-
        The challenge in using a standard gantry platform is its                              fully pot many long shots. It may be possible to further
     limited accuracy, as industrial robotics tend to be highly                               refine our calibration technique, successively unraveling
     precise and repeatable but not terribly accurate. While                                  the robot’s many mysterious nonlinearities. However,
     it’s possible to design a gantry robot with fine-grained                                 the likely result of such an effort would be a very brittle
     accuracy, such a device would be expensive, delicate,                                    system—any change in the system parameters, due to
     and unlikely to maintain its accuracy while absorbing                                    aging or other extrinsic conditions such as vibrations or
     the impacts required to place shots. A more reasonable                                   temperature, would require a tedious recalibration.
     approach is to demand less accuracy from the primary                                        To improve positioning accuracy, we have developed
     positioning device and rely upon the vision system for                                   an eye-in-hand visual-servoing system in which the LVS
     calibration and correction.                                                              camera is mounted on the end-effector with its optical
        One calibration technique involved both the LVS and                                   axis pointing roughly along the direction of the cue.
     GVS cameras.9 We repeatedly positioned the robot over                                    The LVS uses the known ball locations determined by
     a series of circular patterns placed on the table surface.                               the GVS as visual landmarks to detect and compensate
     We then used the correspondence between the robot                                        for positioning errors accumulated during the gantry’s
     joint encoder values and the centers of the extracted cir-                               coarse motion.
     cles within the GVS image to determine the functional                                       LVS correction. Consider the nearly perfect straight shot
     relationship between the robot coordinate frame and the                                  illustrated in Figure 4. In this GVS image, the inscribed
     table plane. This technique reduced robot positioning                                    line is defined by the extracted center locations of the

48   Computer

               Authorized licensed use limited to: Queens University. Downloaded on October 28, 2008 at 09:16 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
cue and object balls prior to placing the shot. The
rendered circles are a sequence of three extracted
positions of the object ball, at times t0 to t2, once the
shot has been placed. The centers of these circles fall
on or close to the line, indicating that the robot was
positioned to make a very accurate straight shot.
The final resting positions of the cue and object balls
at time tf also fall on this line, further supporting the
shot’s quality.
   From the LVS’s vantage, this is the ideal line. When
the robot is servoed to its shot position, as deter-
mined by the GVS, it accumulates error. By analyz-
ing the LVS image, and comparing the line connect-
ing the current cue and object ball centers with the
ideal line, the system can calculate transformations
that correct for the robot positioning error.10
   Figure 5a shows an LVS image acquired after the
robot has been servoed to its shot position, using Figure 4. Straight shot. Intermediate object ball locations fall on a line
only the information from the GVS. The current defined by initial cue and object ball locations.
(red) and ideal (green) lines aren’t aligned, indi-
cating positioning error. After the system executes the to further rotate and translate the cue around the cue-
automatic alignment procedure, the current line overlaps ball center to execute a cut shot of any desired angle and
almost exactly with the ideal line, as shown in Figure spin.
5b, and the shot will therefore be very close to a perfect
straight shot.                                             GAMING
   Alignment methods. We have developed two different        For those who play pool only casually, skill is the limit-
methods to align the robot position with the LVS ideal ing factor, and sinking the current ball is usually the sole
line.10 The simpler one is iterative and based entirely on concern. For more advanced players, however, strategy
2D LVS image data. The other method uses knowledge of
the 3D rigid transformation between the robot wrist coor-
dinate reference frame and the LVS optical frame. This
transformation, known as the tool control frame (TCF)
matrix, is determined offline in a calibration stage.
   Figure 6 plots the result of an experiment designed to
characterize the performance of these two methods. A
total of 90 straight shots were executed. Thirty of these
shots used only information from the GVS and robot
calibration, 30 more applied alignment using the image-
based method, and the final 30 used the position-based
method. We calculated the angular error of each shot by            (a)
extracting the object-ball center locations at a number
of (at least two) positions along their trajectories using
the GVS and comparing the angle of this line with the
line defined by the cue and object balls prior to placing
the shot (similar to Figure 4).
   We plotted the angular errors for each of the 3
sets of 30 shots in ascending order. Alignment using
either method significantly reduced the angular error.
Without alignment, the mean absolute error was
1.8 degrees. With alignment, the error was reduced
by more than two thirds, to 0.51 degrees and 0.56
                                                                   (b)
degrees for the image- and position-based methods,
respectively. While the accuracy is similar for both
alignment methods, the position-based method is Figure 5. LVS correction. (a) Current (red) and ideal (green) lines
approximately 40 percent faster. Once the straight before alignment. (b) After alignment, current and ideal lines
shot is aligned accurately, the TCF matrix can be used overlap.

                                                                                                                                              January 2008 49

       Authorized licensed use limited to: Queens University. Downloaded on October 28, 2008 at 09:16 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
                                C O V E R F E AT U R E

     becomes a key element of the game, and professionals are                                                    • accurate, requiring no discrete time step; and
     known to plan five or more shots ahead for a given table                                                    • time efficient, requiring approximately two to three
     state. For a robotic system to play competitively, it must                                                    orders of magnitude fewer computations per shot.
     therefore strategize computationally, which involves both
     predicting and planning future table states. This requires                                              This added efficiency is especially important when the
     the interplay of physics simulation and search.                                                         physics simulator is used in expanding a game tree, as
                                                                                                             many different shots—sometimes tens of thousands or
     Physics simulation                                                                                      more—might need to be simulated prior to making a
        To predict the table state after a shot so that subse-                                               decision.
     quent shots can be planned, an accurate physics model                                                      Our physics simulator was the basis for the Compu-
     is necessary. Spin is an essential element of the game,                                                 tational 8 Ball Tournaments at the 10th and 11th Inter-
     and imparting spin on the cue ball by displacing and                                                    national Computer Olympiads.13 These tournaments let
     angling the cue at impact is a technique used to control                                                teams develop different strategy engines and compete
     the interaction and placement of balls following a shot.11                                              using the common physics simulator.
     The physics model therefore involves conserving not only                                                   One consideration in modeling the physics was shot
     linear but also angular momentum.                                                                       noise. When a human or robotic player takes a shot, error
        We have developed a physics simulator that predicts a                                                in the cue’s position and velocity makes each shot noni-
     shot’s outcome from a derived physics model.12 Unlike                                                   deal. To make the simulation more realistic and the com-
     physics simulators that use the more common numerical                                                   petition more challenging, we added zero-mean random
     integration approach, our method operates in the con-                                                   Gaussian noise to each of the five shot parameters that
     tinuous domain, predicting the times of pending events                                                  determine the outcome of a shot: two angles (θ,φ), two
     such as collisions or transitions between motion states.                                                offsets (a, b), and the striking speed V.14 The sigma values
     Our technique returns an exact analytic solution based                                                  of each distribution were empirically determined to cause
     on a parameterization of the separation of two moving                                                   one missed shot every 10 shots on average, a success rate
     balls as a function of time. The resulting equation is a                                                similar to that of advanced human play. When planning
     quartic polynomial that can be solved either iteratively                                                a shot for robotic play, a noise model based on the robot’s
     or in closed form to determine the collision time. A simi-                                              calibrated positioning accuracy can be used to determine
     lar derivation exists for other events, such as ball-rail and                                           the probability of a given shot’s success.
     -pocket collisions and transitions from sliding-to-rolling
     and rolling-to-stationary states.                                                                       Search
        Compared to integration, our approach is more                       With the physics simulator’s ability to predict a shot’s
                                                                                             outcome, it’s then necessary to evalu-
                                                                                             ate many possible shot sequences to
            7                                                                                determine the best shot to place given
                     Without LVS                                                             the current table state. Our approach
            6        LVS image-based                                                         to this search is based on the mini-
                     LVS position-based                                                      max game tree used in games like
                                                                                             chess and checkers.15,16 While the
            5
                                                                                             basic concept is the same as in chess,
       Angle error (degree)

                                                                                             one difference is that pool is played in
            4                                                                                a continuous, rather than a discrete,
                                                                                             domain. The size of the search space
            3                                                                                for any particular shot is therefore
                                                                                             truly infinite, rather than the huge
                                                                                             but finite search space of chess.
            2
                                                                                               Another unique consideration in
                                                                                             pool is shot noise. In practice, each of
            1                                                                                the five shot parameters has an element
                                                                                             of uncertainty that can be modeled as
            0                                                                                a probability distribution. For this rea-
              1    3     5     7    9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29                          son, we have adapted the expectimax
                                        Shots (in ascending order)                           search tree, which has been applied to
                                                                                             games like backgammon that have a
     Figure 6. Angular error in straight shot tests with LVS correction. Alignment reduced probabilistic component. Because pool
     the error by more than two thirds, to 0.51 degrees and 0.56 degrees for the image- and is played in a continuous domain, the
     position-based methods, respectively.                                                   chosen tree search algorithm incorpo-

50   Computer

                              Authorized licensed use limited to: Queens University. Downloaded on October 28, 2008 at 09:16 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 Table 1. Summary across search depths for zero-, low-, and high-noise tournaments.

                                                                                                                                Average         Average
                                               Average wins              Average points               Average point             misses          ball-in-hand
 Noise              Player                     (percent)                 scored                       differential              (percent)       (percent)

 Zero               Greedy                            9.9                      771.6                   –1,093.3                     0.0             10.3
                    All depth 1                     61.1                     1,390.8                      278.4                    0.0               2.5
                    All depth 2                     79.9                     1,622.5                      814.9                    0.0               2.5
 Low                Greedy                          19.9                       963.1                     –791.0                    6.3              12.0
                    All depth 1                     62.7                     1,458.8                      323.9                    2.6               3.6
                    All depth 2                     67.4                     1,523.9                      467.1                    1.6               3.4
 High               Greedy                          36.5                     1,301.7                     –314.6                   11.8              14.3
                    All depth 1                     54.8                     1,484.4                      114.2                    8.9              10.4
                    All depth 2                     58.7                     1,519.9                      200.4                    9.3               9.0

rates statistical sampling to account for uncertainty in shot                                  the player looks, and how the player controls the cue
execution. The utility of a future table state is weighted by                                  ball position for the next shot.
its probability of occurrence, and the weighted utilities of
the children of each node are combined when considering                                    We examined numerous combinations of tree-scor-
which path to traverse.                                                                 ing variations—Monte Carlo, probabilistic, or success-
                                                                                        weighted—and evaluation-function variations: average,
Empirical evaluation of strategic play                                                  maximum, or weighted. Within each tournament, the
   To explore the benefits of strategic play in pool, we                                players with common search algorithm/evaluation func-
executed a set of experiments using this tree-search                                    tions (but varying search depth) played 200-game matches
framework.                                                                              against one another and against the greedy player in a
   Methodology. We simulated a series of 8 Ball tourna-                                 round-robin format. The winning player of each game
ments involving 19 competitors, all with identical shot-                                received a total of 10 points, and the losing player received
generation algorithms. Eighteen of the competitors used                                 one point for each pocketed ball of its color group (stripes
different tree-search depths, tree-scoring variations, and                              or solids), for a maximum of seven points. The match
evaluation-function variations; the 19th used a depth-                                  score was the sum of the game scores.
zero “greedy” shot-selection algorithm based solely on                                     Results. Table 1 summarizes the results from these
the probability of the current shot’s success with no                                   experiments. Players are ranked by their overall perfor-
regard for the resulting table state or future shots. This                              mance by averaging the percentage of games won, points
greedy player had the same skill level as the other com-                                scored, point differential, miss rate, and percentage of
petitors but thought like an amateur.                                                   shots resulting in a ball-in-hand. The percentage of shots
   Three tournaments were played with three different                                   resulting in a BIH indicates not only how often a player
noise models reflecting the players’ technical skill level.                             fouled, but more importantly how often it left itself with
For the high-noise model, about 80 percent of balls were                                no shot. The greedy player was more heavily penalized
sunk as planned; for low noise, about 90 percent; and for                               by this setting because it never considered the table state
zero noise, all shots were executed exactly as planned. All                             resulting from its chosen shot.
players in each tournament used the same noise model and                                   In the zero-noise tournament, the deeper-searching
search algorithm. Each tournament therefore isolated per-                               players consistently outplayed their shallower-searching
formance as a function of tree-search depth and evaluation-                             competitors. For a given search type/evaluation function
function variation. A search depth of 1, for example, con-                              variant, the depth 2 player always defeated the greedy
siders not only the current shot but also all shots resulting                           player easily and then defeated the depth 1 player in
from the current shot. The various scoring and evaluation                               turn. The greedy player was defeated in all matches in
functions differed in how they rated a leaf node’s utility as                           the zero-noise tournament, winning at best 16.5 percent
well as in how they combined the information from child                                 of the games in its match against one player. Against the
nodes in propagating back up the tree.                                                  greedy player, all of the depth 2 players scored more wins
   This is similar to comparing two human players by                                    with a higher point differential than the corresponding
categorizing their play in two areas:                                                   depth 1 player.
                                                                                           Look-ahead. Positional play in the form of look-ahead
  • technical skill—precision in executing shots; and                                   is clearly an important consideration in pool. Choosing
  • level of strategic play—how far ahead in the game                                   the easiest shot, or the shot with the highest probability

                                                                                                                                                      January 2008 51

         Authorized licensed use limited to: Queens University. Downloaded on October 28, 2008 at 09:16 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
                C O V E R F E AT U R E

     of success, doesn’t result in a competitive player; plan-                             tor responsible for the forward motion of Deep Green’s
     ning strategically using look-ahead does. These results                               stroke has a dedicated digital control unit that can be
     mirror the expectation for human players similarly char-                              commanded in either position or velocity modes. The
     acterized by technical skill and level of strategic reason-                           cue’s speed can range from almost stationary to approxi-
     ing. Players are always limited by their technical skill,                             mately 3 m/s, with an average error of approximately 0.1
     regardless of how strategically they plan shots. However,                             percent. In contrast, humans tend to strike with one of
     for sufficiently skilled players, the benefits of strategic                           six speeds: slow, medium-slow, medium, medium-fast,
     reasoning and cue-ball placement in the form of look-                                 fast, or break. The added graduation in controlling cue
     ahead always dominate over less strategic play.                                       speed translates to an increased ability to place the cue
       While these experiments have evaluated look-ahead                                   ball and predict and control the table state.
     only to a depth of 2, the benefits of look-ahead should                                  Once the mechanics of placing a shot have been mas-
     continue to be apparent for search depths up to 8, at                                 tered, pool becomes a strategic game, and here too the
     which point all game tree branches will have terminated,                              machine has a potential advantage. The essence of pool
     with all balls sunk and the game completed. In practice,                              strategy is the ability to look ahead and predict the table’s
     expanding the game tree to greater depths can be quite                                state following a potential shot or series of potential
     time expensive, and so tournament competitors have                                    shots. This same capability lets computers outperform
     restricted their searches to depths of 2 or 3.                                        people at chess and other games recently believed to be
                                                                                           only within the realm of human mastery.
     Advantages of Machine Play
        In many ways, pool is an ideal game for automation.                                Need for intelligence
     A great deal of human pool instruction and practice is                                  The Deep Green project has inspired polar opposite
     oriented toward establishing an accurate and repeatable                               responses on the degree of difficulty required to attain our
     stroke. Machines routinely outperform humans at posi-                                 goal. Some people who are familiar with technology but
     tioning accuracy and repeatability, and they function                                 not with pool have regarded it as a straightforward task,
     consistently, without the performance-degrading effects                               requiring only standard robotic techniques to provide a
     of muscle fatigue. They also aren’t susceptible to psy-                               solution. In contrast, proficient players who have no spe-
     chological pressure, a significant source of variation and                            cial relationship with technology tend to argue that pool is
     failure in human play.                                                                a distinctly human activity, requiring human intelligence
        In addition, a machine like Deep Green can sense the                               and skill, and that automating it is impossible.
     balls’ absolute metric locations in the table coordinate                                Our view lies somewhere between these two extremes.
     reference frame. Humans can ascertain the balls’ geo-                                 We believe that developing a robotic system to play pool
     metric arrangement based on their relative positions on                               competitively against a proficient human opponent is
     the table, allowing them to plan and execute challenging                              achievable. The technical problems are both interesting and
     shots, but in certain situations even skilled humans have                             sufficiently challenging to motivate advanced research, but
     difficulty perceiving the correct angles. For example, shots                          not so difficult as to evade a meaningful solution.
     that involve multiple banks are inherently difficult to per-                            Another question that Deep Green raises is whether
     ceive, and humans often use inexact systems based on                                  computational intelligence is necessary for robotic pool.
     table landmarks (diamonds) to augment their perception.                               Isn’t an accurate positioning system and simple shot
     In contrast, the machine resolves the metric location of                              planning based purely on geometry sufficient? There are
     all balls and table elements such as rails and pockets. This                          two answers to this question. First, accurate positioning
     allows for more exact geometric planning, and enhances                                of a standard gantry robot is itself a challenging goal
     the machine’s ability to predict a shot’s outcome.                                    requiring sensor-based methods for calibration and cor-
        Another advantage of the machine is its computational                              rection. Second, even if perfectly accurate positioning
     simulation of the table’s physics. Most human players                                 were possible, it’s still advantageous to play strategically
     rely on an intuitive understanding of this aspect of the                              and plan ahead a number of shots, as evidenced by our
     game. Typically with little or no formal knowledge of                                 experiments with zero-noise tournaments.
     physics, they develop heuristics to predict the subsequent
     table state that results from the multiple interactions of

                                                                                           D
     any particular shot. While often useful, these heuris-                                       eep Green currently plays at a better-than-ama-
     tics have limited fidelity. In contrast, the machine has                                     teur level, planning and executing difficult combi-
     an executable physics model and, so long as a handful                                        nation and rail shots from across the table. It has
     of parameters have been estimated through calibration,                                pocketed runs of four consecutive balls, and it’s only a
     can use a physics simulator to predict the resulting table                            matter of time before it can consistently run the table.
     state both accurately and efficiently.                                                  Several research challenges must be addressed to advance
        Moreover, the cue end-effector provides precise con-                               the system further. The most difficult will emerge in com-
     trol of stroke speed. The electromagnetic linear actua-                               peting against proficient human opponents. Humans are

52   Computer

            Authorized licensed use limited to: Queens University. Downloaded on October 28, 2008 at 09:16 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
crafty competitors, able to efficiently recognize and exploit                         15. W. Leckie and M. Greenspan, “Monte-Carlo Methods in Pool
weaknesses in their opponents. To play at a competitive                                   Strategy Game Trees,” Proc. 5th Int’l Conf. Computers and
level, Deep Green must incorporate insights from machine-                                 Games (CG 06), LNCS 4630, Springer, 2007.
learning and opponent-modeling techniques. ■                                          16. M. Smith, “PickPocket: A Computer Billiards Shark,” Artifi-
                                                                                          cial Intelligence, Nov. 2007, pp. 1069-1091.

Acknowledgments
  The authors thank Precarn Inc., the Institute for Robot-
ics and Intelligent Systems, the Canada Foundation for                                Michael Greenspan is an associate professor in the Depart-
Innovation, and the Natural Sciences and Engineering                                  ment of Electrical and Computer Engineering and in the
Research Council of Canada for their financial support,                               School of Computing, Queen’s University, Kingston,
and Elisha Hardwick for her photographic work. They                                   Ontario, Canada, and is spending the year as a visiting sci-
also thank the many students who have contributed long                                entist at the University of Coimbra, Portugal. His research
hours to the development of the Deep Green system.                                    focuses on problems in computer vision and computer gam-
                                                                                      ing. Greenspan received a PhD in systems and computer
                                                                                      engineering from Carleton University, Ottawa. Contact
References                                                                            him at michael.greenspan@queensu.ca.
 1. Sporting Goods Manufacturing Assoc., State of the Industry
    Report, 2005.                                                                     Joseph Lam is a PhD candidate in the Department of Elec-
 2. S.W.S. Chang, “Automating Skills Using a Robot Snooker Player,”                   trical and Computer Engineering at Queen’s University.
    doctoral dissertation, Univ. of Bristol, Bristol, UK, 1994.                       His research interests include computer vision and visual
 3. R. Popper, “Bring Back the Snooker-Playing Robot!,” The                           servoing. Contact him at jctlam@gmail.com.
    Guardian, 7 Aug. 2007, p. 3.
 4. M.E. Alian et al., “Roboshark: A Gantry Pool Player Robot,”                       Marc Godard is a bachelor’s student in the School of
    Proc. 35th Int’l Symp. Robotics (ISR 04), 2004; www.cs.sfu.                       Computing, Queen’s University. His research interests
    ca/~psabzmey/personal/publ/papers/alian_roboshark_isr04.                          include computer vision, cognitive models, and prediction
    pdf.                                                                              algorithms. Contact him at 4mg12@qlink.queensu.ca.
 5. S.C. Chua et al., “Performance Evaluation of Fuzzy-Based
    Decision System for Pool,” Applied Soft Computing, Jan.                           Imran Zaidi is a bachelor’s student in the School of Com-
    2007, pp. 411-424.                                                                puting, Queen’s University. Contact him at 3aiz@qlink.
 6. Z.M. Lin, J.S. Yang, and C.Y. Yang, “Grey Decision-Making for                     queensu.ca.
    a Billiard Robot,” Proc. 2004 IEEE Int’l Conf. Systems, Man
    and Cybernetics, vol. 6, IEEE Press, 2004, pp. 5350-5355.                         Sam Jordan is a master’s student in the Department of
 7. L.B. Larsen, M.D. Jensen, and W.K. Vodzi, “Multimodal                             Electrical and Computer Engineering at Queen’s Univer-
    User Interaction in an Automatic Pool Trainer,” Proc. 4th                         sity. His research interests include robotics, augmented
    IEEE Int’l Conf. Multimodal Interfaces (ICMI 2002), IEEE                          reality, and human-computer interaction. Contact him
    CS Press, 2002, pp. 361-366.                                                      at 3sj1@queensu.ca.
 8. H. Denman, N. Rea, and A. Kokaram, “Content-Based Anal-
    ysis for Video from Snooker Broadcasts,” Computer Vision                          Will Leckie is an electro-optics hardware designer with
    and Image Understanding, Nov./Dec. 2003, pp. 176-195.                             Nortel at its Carling Campus in Ottawa. His research
 9. F. Long et al., “Robotic Pool: An Experiment in Automatic Pot-                    interests include robotics and artificial intelligence. Leckie
    ting,” Proc. 2004 IEEE/RSJ Int’l Conf. Intelligent Robots and                     received a master’s degree in electrical and computer engi-
    Systems (IROS 2004), vol. 3, IEEE Press, 2004, pp. 361-366.                       neering from Queen’s University. Contact him at will.
10. J. Lam, “Eye-in-Hand Visual Servoing to Improve Accuracy                          leckie@ece.queensu.ca.
    in Pool Robotics,” master’s thesis, Dept. Electrical and Com-
    puter Eng., Queen’s Univ., Kingston, Canada, 2007.                                Ken Anderson is a software engineer at Larus Technologies
11. D.G. Alciatore, The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Bil-                       in Ottawa. His research interests include robotics, single-
    liards, Sterling, 2004.                                                           agent search, and computer games. Anderson received a
12. W. Leckie and M. Greenspan, “Pool Physics Simulation by                           master’s degree in computing science from the University
    Event Prediction 2: Collisions,” Int’l Computer Games Assoc.                      of Alberta. Contact him at anderson@cs.ualberta.ca.
    J., Mar. 2006, pp. 24-31.
13. M. Greenspan, “Pickpocket Wins Pool Tournament,” Int’l                            Donna Dupuis is a master’s student in the Department of
    Computer Games Assoc. J., Sept. 2006, pp. 153-156.                                Electrical Engineering at the University of British Colum-
14. W. Leckie and M. Greenspan, “Pool Physics Simulation by                           bia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. Her research
    Event Prediction 1: Motion Transitions,” Int’l Computer                           interests include computer vision, robotics, and artificial
    Games Assoc. J., Dec. 2005, pp. 214-222.                                          intelligence. Contact her at dupuisd@mech.ubc.ca.

                                                                                                                                              January 2008 53

       Authorized licensed use limited to: Queens University. Downloaded on October 28, 2008 at 09:16 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_2_1_minimum_cue_tip_friction_required_for_no_slip_horizontal_impact.pdf
title: TP 2.1 - Minimum cue tip friction required for no-slip horizontal impact
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                               technical proof
                                TP 2.1
    Minimum cue tip friction required for no-slip horizontal impact
                                         supporting:
                       “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                 http://billiards.colostate.edu
                        by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                       originally posted: 7/2/03              last revision: 9/11/08

                                                                                      D
                          ball size:                D  2.25 in              R 
                                                                                      2

                                                    ^
                                   ^                Fn
                                   Ft       
                                             ^
                                             F

                                                                          R              a
                                                R
                                        a       
                                                2    2
                                            R -a

        Note: in this simple analysis, the effects of squirt are not considered. The impulse of
        the cue is assumed to be in the cue direction. In reality, the exact angle (and the
        effective tip offset) varies with the amount of English and the type of cue. However,
        squirt angles are typically less than 2 degrees, so the effects are small.

        Horizontal impulse between the cue stick and cue ball:
                                                            F'

        Normal impulse (perpendicular to the ball):
                                                                                                           ( 1)
                                                     F' n = F' cos ( α)

        Tangential impulse (tangent to the ball):
                                                                                                           ( 2)
                                                     F' t = F'  sin( α)
On the verge of slip, using Equation 1:

                                  F' t = μ F' n = μ ( F'  cos( α) )                         ( 3)

Equating Equations 2 and 3 gives:
                                                                                     a
                        sin( α)                         a                μ( a) 
                   μ=             = tan( α) =                                       2      2
                        cos( α)                        2     2                      R a
                                                    R a

Typical values for the coefficient of friction required to avoid a miscue:

        at the generally recommended maximum tip offset:

                            μ( 0.5 R)  0.577

        at typical measured maximum effective offsets (e.g., see my October '05 article):

                              μ( 0.55 R)  0.659
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_3_1_90_degree_rule.pdf
title: TP 3.1 - 90 degree Rule
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                           technical proof
                                                        TP 3.1
                                                       90° rule
                                               supporting:
                             “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                           http://billiards.colostate.edu
                               by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                             originally posted: 7/3/03          last revision: 9/22/20

                  before impact                 at impact                        after impact
                                                                     v2'
                                         n                                                

                                                            t              2                        tangent
                                                2                                             v1'
                     2                                                                                line
                                  v1
                                                       1                              1

                              1
                                             impact
                                               line                            v1cos()
                   aiming                                       v1         
                     line
                                   cut angle
                                                                               v1sin()
                                      ()

                         Assumptions:
                          - the coefficient of friction between the balls is negligible
                          - the collision is perfectly elastic (the coefficient of restitution is 1)
                          - both balls have the same mass
                          - ball 2 is stationary initially

        Because there are no forces in the t direction, conservation of linear momentum gives:
                         v'1t = v 1t = v 1 sin ( ϕ)   the t component of ball 1's velocity remains constant

                         v'2t = v 2t = 0               ball 2 has no t component of velocity before or after impact

        Conservation of momentum in the n direction gives:
                         v'1n  v'2n = v 1n = v 1 cos ( ϕ)      ( 1)

        The coefficient of restitution relation gives:
                         v'2n  v'1n = v 1n                      ( 2)                     the separation speed is
                                                                                          equal to the approach speed
Solving Equation 1 and 2 gives:

              v'1n = 0
                                             ball 1 loses all of its speed in the n direction

              v'2n = v 1n
                                             ball 1 transfers all speed in the n direction to ball 2

After impact, ball 1 has a t component only and ball 2 has an n component only. Therefore,

                      v'1 and v'2 are perpendicular

                        θ = 90 deg

Here is a more elegant proof:

      Conservation of momentum gives:
               V1 = V'1  V'2                ( 3)     where a capital letter denotes a vector

      Conservation of energy gives:
                  2         2        2
               v 1 = v'1  v'2               ( 4)     where a lower case letter denotes magnitude

      Taking the vector dot product of Equation 3 with itself gives:

                  2         2                              2
               v 1 = v'1  2  v'1  v'2  cos( θ)  v'2           ( 5)

      Subtracting Equation 4 from Equation 5 gives:

               2  v'1  v'2  cos( θ) = 0

      This can be true only if:

               θ = 90 deg

      or if
              v'1 = 0                    for a head-on stop shot

Even simpler:

     The Pythagorian Theorem applied to the triangle representing the vector sum in
     Equation 3, along with Equation 4, gives the 90 degree result.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_3_2_ball_speeds_and_distances_after_stun_shot_impact.pdf
title: TP 3.2 - Ball speeds and distances after stun-shot impact
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                          technical proof
                                                TP 3.2
                           Ball speeds and distances after stun-shot impact
                                                       from:
                                  “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                                  http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                   by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                              originally posted: 7/10/03                       last revision: 5/9/2021

                                       For a rolling cue ball shot, see TP A.16.

                                                                vc
                                                   v

                                                                  vo            cut angle 

        From conservation of momentum (see TP 3.1),
                       v  100                        incoming speed, scaled to 100

                       v o ( ϕ)  v  cos ( ϕ)        post-impact object ball speed

                       v c( ϕ)  v  sin ( ϕ)         post-impact cue ball speed

                                                   ϕ  0 deg 1 deg  90 deg

              100

                  80

                  60
     vo( ϕ)

     vc( ϕ)
                  40

                  20

                   0
                       0              15               30              45            60          75         90
                                                                       ϕ
                                                                       deg
 From TP A.23, cut angle and ball-hit fraction are related according to:

                    ϕ( f )  asin( 1  f )           f ( ϕ)  1  sin( ϕ)

Here are the ball speeds and CB-to-OB speed ratios for various ball-hit fractions:

                                                                                     
                                                                                 v c ϕf
   fϕ  1             
              ϕf  ϕ fϕ  0  deg               
                                              v c ϕf  0             
                                                                 v o ϕf  100
                                                                                 v o  ϕf 
                                                                                            0

         3                                                                           
                                                                                 v c ϕf
   fϕ 
         4
                       
              ϕf  ϕ fϕ  14.5 deg             
                                              v c ϕf  25            
                                                                 v o ϕf  96.8
                                                                                 v o  ϕf 
                                                                                             0.26

         1                                                                           
                                                                                 v c ϕf
   fϕ 
         2
                       
              ϕf  ϕ fϕ  30 deg               
                                              v c ϕf  50            
                                                                 v o ϕf  86.6
                                                                                 v o  ϕf 
                                                                                             0.58

                                                                                     
                                                                                 v c ϕf
   ϕf  45 deg             
                    fϕ  f ϕf  0.29            
                                              v c ϕf  70.7          
                                                                 v o ϕf  70.7
                                                                                 v o  ϕf 
                                                                                            1

         1                                                                           
                                                                                 v c ϕf
   fϕ 
         4
                       
              ϕf  ϕ fϕ  48.6 deg             
                                              v c ϕf  75            
                                                                 v o ϕf  66.1
                                                                                 v o  ϕf 
                                                                                             1.13

   fϕ  0             
              ϕf  ϕ fϕ  90 deg               
                                              v c ϕf  100           
                                                                 v o ϕf  0
 From TP 4.1, the final ball speeds (after rolling develops) are 5/7 of the initial sliding speeds. Also,
 with constant rolling resistance, the travel distance is proportional to the square of the speed (as in
 TP 4.1), so the approximate relative distances traveled by each ball, compared to the distance the
 stunned cue ball would travel without collision (dmax), is:

                                          2                                    2
           d o ( φ)    v o ( φ)              d c( φ)   v c( φ) 
                         5                                       5
                                                                                        d max  d c( 90 deg)
                        7                                     7         

                                               ϕ  0  deg 1  deg  90 deg

                    100

                     80

          do( ϕ)
                     60
         dmax  %

          dc( ϕ)

         dmax  % 40

                     20

                      0
                          0               15          30              45           60          75            90
                                                                      ϕ
                                                                     deg

At a 45-degree cut angle, the post-impact speeds are equal and about 70% of the initial cue
ball speed (see the graph on the previous page). For the same cut angle, the post-impact
ball-travel distances are also equal and 50% of the distance the stunned cue ball would
travel if there were no collision (see the graph above).
The graph above can also be expressed in terms of ball-hit fraction:                             f ( ϕ)  1  sin( ϕ)

               100

                80

     do( ϕ)
                60
    dmax  %

     dc( ϕ)

    dmax  % 40

                20

                 0
                     0                 20                 40              60                80                 100
                                                                 f ( ϕ)
                                                                  %

  A 45-degree cut angle is between a 1/4-ball and 1/3-ball hit:

                         1                                                       1
                              25 %        f ( 45 deg)  29.289 %                  33.333 %
                         4                                                       3

  Interestingly, with a stun shot, the speed fraction the CB loses when hitting the OB is
  the same as the ball-hit fraction (BHF). For example, with a 1/2-ball hit, the CB loses 1/2
  of its speed; and with a full hit (BHF=1), it loses all of its speed:

                                              v c( ϕ)
                                                        = sin( ϕ) = 1  f ( ϕ)
                                                v
Here are travel distance ratios for various ball-hit fractions and cut angles:
                               f ( ϕ)  1  sin( ϕ)      ϕ( f )  asin( 1  f )

                                                                                        approximate
                                                                                       OB:CB distance
full-ball hit:                                                                             ratio:
      fx  1                                                     CB stops in place,
                                          
                                 φx  ϕ fx  0  deg
                                                                  OB travels same distance CB would have

3/4-ball hit:
            3
      fx 
            4                             
                                 φx  ϕ fx  14.5 deg              
                                                                 d o φx                     15 : 1
                                                                            15
                                                                 d c φx 

1/2-ball hit (30-degree cut):

      fx 
            1
                                          
                                 φx  ϕ fx  30 deg                
                                                                 d o φx                     3:1
            2                                                              3
                                                                 d c φx 

45-degree cut:

      fx  f ( 45 deg)  29.289 %     φx  45 deg               
                                                                 d o φx
                                                                                            1:1
                                                                           1
                                                                 d c φx 

1/4-ball hit:
      fx 
            1                                                        
                                                                 d o φx
            4                             
                                 φx  ϕ fx  48.6 deg
                                                                 d c φx 
                                                                            0.78          1.5 : 2

3/16-ball hit (between 1/4 and 1/8):
            3
      fx 
            16                            
                             φx  ϕ fx  54.3 deg                  
                                                                 d o φx
                                                                                            1:2
                                                                            0.51
                                                                 d c φx 

1/8-ball hit:
      fx 
            1                                                        
                                                                 d o φx
            8                             
                                 φx  ϕ fx  61 deg
                                                                 d c φx 
                                                                            0.31           1:3
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_3_3_30_degree_rule.pdf
title: TP 3.3 - 30° rule
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                                     technical proof
                                                                TP 3.3
                                                                30° rule

                                                      supporting:
                                    “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                                http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                     by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                            originally posted: 7/6/2003              last revision: 10/2/2010

          An complete derivation, arrived at by solving the general equations of motion,
          can be found in TP A.4.

                                   Ball-hit fraction:

                                           f  0 0.01  1

                                   Cut angle:
                                             φ( f )  asin( 1  f )

                                   Cue ball final deflected angle:

                                                                sin( φ)  cos( φ) 
                                             θ( φ)  atan
                                                                     2 2 
                                                             sin( φ)  
                                                                      5 

      For a half-ball hit:                               For a 1/4-ball hit:                 For a 3/4-ball hit:

                  φ
                        1
                                                                  φ
                                                                        1
                                                                                                   φ
                                                                                                         3
                        30 deg                                        48.59 deg                      14.478 deg
                    2                                             4                              4

                  θ φ
                            1 
                                                                  θ φ
                                                                            1 
                                                                                                   θ φ
                                                                                                             3 
                            33.67 deg                                     27.267 deg                   27.626 deg
                     2                                            4                           4 
                  deflected cue ball angle vs. ball-hit fraction:

              40

              30

θ( φ( f ) )
              20
   deg

              10

                  0
                      0            0.2               0.4                0.6                   0.8             1
                                                                    f

                  deflected cue ball angle vs. cut angle:                 φ  0  deg 1  deg  89 deg

          40

          30

  θ( φ)
          20
   deg

          10

              0
                  0                 20                     40                 60                        80
                                                                φ
                                                                deg
Maximum cue ball deflected angle:

              Deflected angle as a function of cut angle is:

                                           sin( φ)  cos( φ) 
                                  atan
                                                  2 2 
                                          sin( φ)  
                                                   5 

              The derivative of this with respect to φ (using MathCAD) is:

                                      45 sin( φ) 2  10 
                                                        
                                      45 sin( φ) 2  4 
                                                         

              At the maximum, the numerator of this expression must be 0, so:

                                                     10          2
                                     sin( φ) =            =
                                                     45          3

              Therefore, the maximum cue ball deflection occurs at a cut angle of:

                                              2   28.126 deg
                                φ  asin       
                                              3 

              which corresponds to a ball-hit fraction of:

                          f ( φ)  1  sin( φ)                  f ( φ)  0.529

              and the maximum deflected angle is:

                                         θ( φ)  33.749 deg
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_3_4_margin_of_error_based_on_distance_and_cut_angle.pdf
title: TP 3.4 - Margin of error based on distance and cut angle
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                 technical proof
                                      TP 3.4
                  Margin of error based on distance and cut angle
                                                from:
                           “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                      http://billiards.colostate.edu
                            by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                           originally posted: 7/8/03      last revision: 11/11/2018

                                                target
                                                 line                     

                                 
                    aiming
                      line

                       
                                                                                            
                                                                                2R
                                                                         2R
                                         d
                                                                     
                                                            ~d
                                                                          

                                                                               horizontal
                                                                               projection
                                                                                  line

ball radius: R  1.125             : cut angle           : object ball leaving angle
                  d: distance between cue ball (CB) and object ball (OB)

                                      Assume: d >> R

        From the bottom right portion of the figure above, equating the vertical components of the
        loop (perpendicular to the horizontal project line) gives:

                           d  sin( Δϕ) = 2  R sin( Δθ  ϕ  Δϕ)  2  R sin( ϕ  Δϕ)
          Therefore,
                            Δθ( d ϕ Δϕ)  ϕ  Δϕ  asin            sin( Δϕ)  sin( ϕ  Δϕ) 
                                                                     d
                                                                                                          (1)
                                                                 2 R                                

The following plot shows how the angular error in OB motion (∆θ) varies with distance between the CB
and OB (d) at different cut angles (ϕ) for a given angular margin for error (∆ϕ) in CB motion (1 deg):
                                                         d  0 0.1  48

     Δθ( d 0 deg 1 deg) 40
              deg

     Δθ( d 60 deg 1 deg) 30
               deg

     Δθ( d 85 deg 1 deg) 20
               deg
                               10

                                0
                                    0      10            20              30             40           50
                                                                 d

The following plot shows how the angular error in OB motion (∆θ) varies with CB angle margin for
error (∆ϕ) at different distances between the CB and OB (d) for a 1/2-ball hit (30 deg cut angle):

                                                  Δϕ  0  deg 0.1 deg  2  deg

                                10

                                 8
       Δθ( 1 30 deg Δϕ)
                deg
                                 6
       Δθ( 6 30 deg Δϕ)
                deg

       Δθ( 12 30 deg Δϕ) 4
                 deg

                                 2

                                 0
                                     0          0.5             1               1.5              2
                                                               Δϕ
                                                               deg
Example: What is the allowable object ball (OB) angle error and required cue ball (CB)
angle accuracy for a slow, 30-degree cut angle (half-ball hit) shot straight into a corner
pocket (i.e., the angle to the pocket is 0 degrees) if the distances between the CB and OB
and the OB and pocket are both about 4 diamonds (about 4.5' = 54" on a 9' table)?

        From Figure 3.41 in the book, the approximate allowable object ball angle error is:
                   Δθallowable  2  deg

        The distance between the CB and OB is:
                   d  54

        and the cut angle for a half-ball hit is:
                   ϕ  30 deg

        Therefore, the required cue ball angle accuracy is:

                  initial guess:   Δϕrequired  0.1 deg
                   Given

                                            
                       Δθ d ϕ Δϕrequired = Δθallowable

                                   
                   Find Δϕrequired  0.073  deg

        So the margin for error for the CB in this shot is very small
        (less than 0.1 degree!)
Allowable cue ball margin for error for various cut angles for the example shot above:

            Δϕ  0.01 deg initial guess

                                     
      Δϕrequired( ϕ)  root Δθ( d ϕ Δϕ)  Δθallowable Δϕ        
                   ϕ  0  deg 1  deg  90 deg

                           0.1

                          0.08

                          0.06
       Δϕ required( ϕ)

             deg
                          0.04

                          0.02

                             0
                                 0          20         40         60          80         100
                                                            ϕ
                                                            deg

                                                            Δϕrequired( 30 deg)  0.073  deg
         Δϕrequired( 0  deg)  0.083  deg
                                                            Δϕrequired( 60 deg)  0.043  deg

         Δϕrequired( 0  deg)                        a straight-in shot is 1.15X (15%) easier than
         Δϕ                     1.142               a 30 degree cut angle shot.
                    ( 30 deg)
           required           

         Δϕrequired( 0  deg) 
         Δϕ                     1.939               a straight-in shot is 1.97X (97%) easier than
         required( 60 deg)                          a 60 degree cut angle shot.
NOTE- If the effective size of the pocket (s) is known (e.g., from TP 3.5-3.8), the allowable angular
error in the OB direction (∆θ), for a given distance to the pocket (dp ), can be calculated with:

                                                      s 
                                                   1 2                                     (2)
                                      Δθ = 2  tan       
                                                      dp 

 A simple way to estimate the effective size of a pocket is to subtract 2 inches (a little less
 than a ball diameter) from the point-to-point pocket-size measurement (p). For example, for
 the shot above, with a 4.5" pocket, with the OB 4.5 feet from the pocket:

                                p  4.5 in      d p  4.5 ft

                                sapprox  p  2  in  2.5 in

                                                      sapprox 
                                Δθapprox  2  atan
                                                       2   2.7 deg
                                                       dp 
                                                                
Now let's answer a common question concerning a straight shot with a total distance D between
the CB and pocket. Which OB position (distance d from CB, and distance dp from the pocket)
results in the most difficult shot?

For a straight shot, the cut angle  is 0, and as long as the OB is not too close to the CB or the
pocket, both the CB angle error  and the allowable OB angle error  are small. Using
small-angle approximations (sin(x)=x, tan(x)=x) for Equations 1 and 2 gives:

                                              d              s
                                      Δθ =           Δϕ =
                                             2 R            dp

So the allowable CB angle error is:

                                                  2  R s
                                         Δϕ =
                                                    d dp

So the shot is most difficult when the product of the distances between the CB & OB (d) and the
OB & pocket (dp ) is greatest. Since the distance between the OB and pocket is:

                                           dp = D  d

The shot is most difficult when:

                                        d
                                           ( d( D  d) ) = 0
                                        dd

                                             D  2d = 0
                                                     D
                                              d=
                                                      2

 So a straight shot is the most difficult when the OB is exactly halfway between the CB
 and the pocket.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_3_5_effective_target_sizes_for_slow_shots_into_a_side_pocket_at_different_angles.pdf
title: TP 3.5 - Effective Target Sizes For Slow Shots Into A Side Pocket At Different Angles
topics: technical_proofs, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
technical proof                                                                             technical proof
                                                 TP 3.5
                               Effective target sizes for slow shots into
                                   a side pocket at different angles
                                                     supporting:
                                   “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                           http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                   by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                               originally posted: 7/4/2003    last revision: 1/22/2023

                                                      p: width of pocket mouth

                                                      center of
                                                     pocket hole

                                                                                                                     α

                                                                        Rhole
                                                             Rhole                                                           ball contacting
                                                                                                                               inside wall
                                                                                                                                of pocket

   ball contacting
   point of pocket
                                                                                  A                        R             C
                                                                b

                               R
                                                                B

                                                                  normal to
                                                               point of contact
θ: angle to the pocket

                direction of                   βl
                 approach

             Ball radius:                           Pocket-specific parameters:
                R := 1.125                          p: mouth width α: wall angle Rhole: hole radius b:shelf depth to hole
                                                       p := 5.0625 α := 14⋅ deg       Rhole := 3            b := 0.1875
         The equations below are derived from the figure above by writing vector loop equations
         around the path shown bold. The pocket target size is defined by the figure below.

                                                                             center of the
    extreme left                                                             mouth of the
  position resulting                                                           pocket
in pocketing the ball

                                                                                                                  θ
                                                          line through
                                                         the center of                target
                                         θ                 the pocket                 center

                                                                                                                                      extreme right
                                                                               target                                              position resulting in
                                                                               center                                               pocketing the ball
                                             sleft                             offset

                                                                                   sright

                          s: effective size of pocket

General equations for the size of left portion of target area assuming point deflection

                                                        ⋅  ⋅ cos( α) − R − Rhole⋅ cos 2 ⋅ βl − θ − α − Rhole + b ⋅ sin( α)
                                                     1      p
     (                       )
   A α , p , b , Rhole , βl , θ :=                                                             (          ) (                  )
                                         (
                                     sin 2 ⋅ βl − θ − α  2    )                                                            

          (                          )               ( )           (                 ) (                  )                (                   )
   polyβ α , p , b , Rhole , βl , θ := R⋅ sin βl + A α , p , b , Rhole , βl , θ ⋅ sin 4 ⋅ βl − 2 ⋅ θ − 2 ⋅ α + Rhole⋅ cos 4 ⋅ βl − 2 ⋅ θ − 2 ⋅ α ...
                                         p
                                                       (               ) (          ) (
                                       + ⋅ cos 2 ⋅ βl − θ + Rhole + b ⋅ sin 2 ⋅ βl − θ
                                         2
                                                                                                   )
                                                          p
              (                      )                   ( )                   (            ) (        ) (
   polyβ_in p , b , Rhole , βl , θ := −R⋅ sin βl + Rhole − ⋅ cos 2 ⋅ βl − θ − Rhole + b ⋅ sin 2 ⋅ βl − θ
                                                          2
                                                                                                                       )
    βguess( θ) := 20⋅ deg +     ⋅ ( θ + 60⋅ deg)
                              70
                                                                                                    β := βguess( 0 ⋅ deg)               β = 52.308 deg
                             130                                                  
                                                           (                   (
                                      root polyβ α , p , b , Rhole , β , θ , β                                  ) )
    βl α , p , b , Rhole , θ := min 
       (                            )
                                                           (
                                     root polyβ_in p , b , Rhole , β , θ , β     (                            ) )
                                        p
                    (                            )
    sleft_point α , p , b , Rhole , θ := ⋅ cos( θ) − R⋅ sin βl α , p , b , Rhole , θ
                                        2
                                                                                              ( (                             ))

Size of the left portion of the target area assuming one wall deflection

                (                            )        (                                                     )
      rwall_1 α , p , b , Rhole , θ := A α , p , b , Rhole , 90⋅ deg , θ ⋅ sin( 2 ⋅ θ + 2 ⋅ α) − Rhole⋅ cos( 2 ⋅ θ + 2 ⋅ α)

                                  p
                (                        )
      rwall_2 p , b , Rhole , θ := ⋅ cos( θ) − Rhole + b ⋅ sin( θ)
                                  2
                                                                           (                    )

           (                             )                     (
      rwall α , p , b , Rhole , θ := rwall_1 α , p , b , Rhole , θ + rwall_2 p , b , Rhole , θ      )                (                  )

      sleft_wall α , p , b , Rhole , θ := − ⋅ cos( −θ) − rwall α , p , b , Rhole , −θ 
                                             p
                    (                        2
                                                 )        
                                                                                                        (                          )

Maximum angle for slight near point deflection and rattle-in
      θ := 70⋅ deg
      Given
                        (
          polyβ α , p , b , Rhole , 90⋅ deg , θ = 0 ⋅ deg          )
      θmax := Find( θ)                   θmax = 68.292 deg                                                      (         (
                                                                                           θmax := root polyβ α , p , b , Rhole , 90⋅ deg , θ , θ    ) )     θmax = 68.292 deg

                    equation check:                                    (
                                                          rwall α , p , b , Rhole , θmax = 1.125                )                       R = 1.125

Critical angle between far point rattle-in and far wall deflection

      θ := −51.4689 ⋅ deg                            β := 25⋅ deg
      Given

                                (
               polyβ_in p , b , Rhole , β , θ = 0         )
      β := Find( β)                     β = 26.036 deg                                                  (
                                                                                           β := βl α , p , b , Rhole , θ       )            β = 26.036 deg

      θ − α + 90⋅ deg − β = −1.505 deg
      θcritical := β + α − 90⋅ deg                            θcritical = −49.964 deg

Minimum angle for far wall deflection
      θmin := −θmax                                  θmin = −68.292 deg
Size of the left portion of the target area

             sleft( θ) :=       0 if θ ≥ θmax

                                0 if θ ≤ θmin

                                             (
                                sleft_wall α , p , b , Rhole , θ  ) if θmin < θ < θcritical
                                sleft_point ( α , p , b , Rhole , θ) otherwise

             sright ( θ) := sleft( −θ)

             s( θ) := sleft( θ) + sright ( θ)

                                (sright( θ) − sleft(θ))
             offset( θ) :=
                                             2

Plot results:
                                                                                (
                                                                              2 ⋅ θmax − 1 ⋅ deg   )
    N := 50               i := 0 .. N                            (       )
                                                     θ := −θmax + 1 ⋅ deg +
                                                      i                                N
                                                                                                       ⋅i

    β := βguess θ
         i                ( i)          βin := β

    Given

                     (
        polyβ α , p , b , Rhole , β , θ = 0              )
    β := Find( β)

    Given

                            (
         polyβ_in p , b , Rhole , βin , θ = 0                )
    βin := Find βin      ( )
              βi  
    β := min 
     i        βin
             i 
                  p
    sleft_point := ⋅ cos θ − R⋅ sin β
               i  2       i          ( )
                                     i                       ( )
                     (
    r := rwall α , p , b , Rhole , −θ
     i                                           i   )
    sleft_wall := − ⋅ cos −θ − r 
                     p
              i      2        i  i     ( )                  
    sleft := if  θ > θmax , 0 , if  θ < θmin , 0 , if  θ < θcritical , sleft_wall , sleft_point   
                   i                   i                   i
         i                                                                       i             i         

    sright := sleft                          s := sleft + sright                     (sright − sleft)
          i        N−i                                                   offset :=
                                                                                            2

                                1
    m( ∆θ) :=                           ⋅s
                         2 ⋅ tan( ∆θ)
     3

     2
s

     1

     0
     − 70       − 35       0         35        70
                          θ
                          deg

         0.6

         0.3

offset    0

     − 0.3

     − 0.6
         − 70      − 35         0         35        70
                                θ
                               deg
                                 90
                                 60
                           120         60

                                 40
                     150                     30

                                 20

m( 1.5⋅ deg)

m( 2⋅ deg)     180                                 0
m( 3⋅ deg)

                     210                     330

                           240         300

                                 270

                                  θ
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_3_6_effective_target_sizes_for_slow_shots_into_a_corner_pocket_at_different_angles.pdf
title: TP 3.6 - Effective Target Sizes For Slow Shots Into A Corner Pocket At Different Angles
topics: technical_proofs, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
technical proof                                                                     technical proof
                                          TP 3.6
                        Effective target sizes for slow shots into
                          a corner pocket at different angles
                                           supporting:
                         “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                   http://billiards.colostate.edu
                          by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                        originally posted: 7/4/2003      last revision: 1/29/2008

                                                                                                      α

                                               R

                                                                     b
                                                                                               R

                                                   p/2
                                                            βl
                  45°

              d

                                           A

                                   θwall
 R

   θ

    sleft
                                         See the general notation presented in TP 3.5

                   Ball radius:                                                    Pocket-specific parameters:
                   R := 1.125                                                      p: mouth width α: wall angle Rhole: hole radius b:shelf depth to hole

                                                                                    p := 4.5875          α := 7 ⋅ deg           Rhole := 2.75       b := 1.125

 General equations for the size of left portion of target area assuming point deflection,
  then one wall deflection or straight-in

                                                            ⋅  ⋅ cos( α) − R − Rhole⋅ cos 2 ⋅ βl − θ − α − Rhole + b ⋅ sin( α)
                                                         1      p
      (
    A α , p , b , Rhole , βl , θ :=  )                                                                             (                  ) (                )
                                                 (
                                         sin 2 ⋅ βl − θ − α  2            )                                                    

               (                         )                   ( )               (                          ) (                         )
    polyβ α , p , b , Rhole , βl , θ := R⋅ sin βl + A α , p , b , Rhole , βl , θ ⋅ sin 4 ⋅ βl − 2 ⋅ θ − 2 ⋅ α + Rhole⋅ cos 4 ⋅ βl − 2 ⋅ θ − 2 ⋅ α ...(           )
                                          p
                                                               (                    ) (
                                        + ⋅ cos 2 ⋅ βl − θ + Rhole + b ⋅ sin 2 ⋅ βl − θ
                                          2
                                                                                                         ) (                )
                                                           p
                    (                    )                    ( )                                    (
    polyβ_in p , b , Rhole , βl , θ := −R⋅ sin βl + Rhole − ⋅ cos 2 ⋅ βl − θ − Rhole + b ⋅ sin 2 ⋅ βl − θ
                                                           2
                                                                                                              ) (                  ) (          )

    βguess( θ) := 20⋅ deg +     ⋅ ( θ + 60⋅ deg)
                              70
                                                                                       β := βguess( 0 ⋅ deg)                β = 52.308⋅ deg
                             130                                      

                                                         (         (
                                      root polyβ α , p , b , Rhole , β , θ , β                   ) )
    βl α , p , b , Rhole , θ := min 
       (                         )
                                                         (                 (
                                     root polyβ_in p , b , Rhole , β , θ , β                   ) )
                                             p
                             (                       )
    sleft_point_wall α , p , b , Rhole , θ := ⋅ cos( θ) − R⋅ sin βl α , p , b , Rhole , θ
                                             2
                                                                                               ( (                     ))

Size of the left portion of the target area assuming one wall deflection

           (                         )       (                                             )
    rwall α , p , b , Rhole , θ := A α , p , b , Rhole , 90⋅ deg , θ ⋅ sin( 2 ⋅ θ + 2 ⋅ α) − Rhole⋅ cos( 2 ⋅ θ + 2 ⋅ α) ...
                                     p
                                                                   (
                                   + ⋅ cos( θ) − Rhole + b ⋅ sin( θ)
                                     2
                                                                                       )

    sleft_wall α , p , b , Rhole , θ := − ⋅ cos( −θ) − rwall α , p , b , Rhole , −θ 
                                           p
                     (                   ) 2         
                                                                                        (                     )

Angle after rail contact

   θrail( θ) := 90⋅ deg − θ

Angle after wall contact

    θwall( θ) := θ − 2 ⋅ α
Angle after rail, then wall contact

                              (
    θrail_wall( θ) := θwall −θrail( θ)   )

Size of the left portion of the target area assuming rattle across two pocket walls

                                   ⋅  ⋅ cos( θ − 2 ⋅ α) − R⋅ cos( θ − α) + sleft_wall α , p , b , Rhole , θwall( θ) 
                              1        p
      Dwall_wall( θ) :=
                        sin( θ − α) 2   
                                                                                                   (                           )
                            p
      sleft_wall_wall( θ) := ⋅ cos( θ) + Dwall_wall( θ) ⋅ sin( θ − α) − R⋅ cos( θ − α)
                            2

Size of the left portion of the target area assuming rattle across three pocket walls

                                        ⋅  ⋅ cos( θ − 2 ⋅ α) − R⋅ cos( θ − α) + sleft_wall_wall θwall( θ) 
                                   1        p
      Dwall_wall_wall( θ) :=
                             sin( θ − α) 2       
                                                                                                               (          )
                                 p
      sleft_wall_wall_wall( θ) := ⋅ cos( θ) + Dwall_wall_wall( θ) ⋅ sin( θ − α) − R⋅ cos( θ − α)
                                 2

Size of the left portion of the target area assuming rail contact and rattle off far point and one wall

                                             ⋅  s             α , p , b , Rhole , −θrail( θ) + ⋅ sin( θ) − R⋅ cos( 45⋅ deg − θ) 
                                    1                                                           p
      d point_wall( θ) :=
                            sin( 45⋅ deg − θ)  left_point_wall
                                                                     (                          2
                                                                                                       )                          
                                  p
      sleft_rail_point_wall( θ) := ⋅ cos( θ) + d point_wall( θ) ⋅ sin( 45⋅ deg − θ) − R⋅ cos( 45⋅ deg − θ)
                                  2

Size of the left portion of the target area assuming rail contact and rattle off far point and two walls

                                             ⋅  sleft_wall_wall −θrail( θ) +          ⋅ sin( θ) − R⋅ cos( 45⋅ deg − θ) 
                                   1                                               p
      d wall_wall( θ) :=
                            sin( 45⋅ deg − θ) 
                                                                 (            )    2                                     

                                 p
      sleft_rail_wall_wall( θ) := ⋅ cos( θ) + d wall_wall( θ) ⋅ sin( 45⋅ deg − θ) − R⋅ cos( 45⋅ deg − θ)
                                 2

Size of the left portion of the target area assuming deflection off the rail and then one pocket wall

                                        ⋅  sleft_wall α , p , b , Rhole , −θrail( θ) +       ⋅ sin( θ) − R⋅ cos( 45⋅ deg − θ) 
                               1                                                           p
       d wall( θ) :=
                       sin( 45⋅ deg − θ) 
                                                      (                             )      2                                   
                             p
       sleft_rail_wall( θ) := ⋅ cos( θ) + d wall( θ) ⋅ sin( 45⋅ deg − θ) − R⋅ cos( 45⋅ deg − θ)
                             2

Size of the left portion of the target area assuming point contact and rattle off two walls

    ϕ1 ( β , θ) := 2 ⋅ β − 90⋅ deg − θ − 2 ⋅ α                 ϕ2 ( β , θ) := ϕ1 ( β , θ) − 2 ⋅ α
                                         ⋅  ⋅ cos( α) − Rhole + b ⋅ sin( α) + Rhole⋅ sin ϕ2 ( β , θ) + α − R
                              1              p
      A2 ( β , θ) :=
                           (
                     cos ϕ2 ( β , θ) + α  2)                              (                   )               
                                                                                                                       (                   )

                                   ⋅  ⋅ cos( α) − R + A2 ( β , θ) ⋅ cos ϕ2 ( β , θ) − α − Rhole⋅ sin ϕ2 ( β , θ) − α − Rhole + b ⋅ sin( α)
                        1              p
A1 ( β , θ) :=
                  (                 )
               cos ϕ1 ( β , θ) + α  2
                                                                                               (               )                   (         
                                                                                                                                                    ) (                )

                                                                       (                             )                        (
      polyβww( β , θ) := −R⋅ sin( β) − A1 ( β , θ) ⋅ cos 2 ⋅ β − θ + ϕ1 ( β , θ) + A2 ( β , θ) ⋅ cos 2 ⋅ β − θ − ϕ2 ( β , θ) ...                        )
                                                                    p
                                            (                                      )
                         + Rhole⋅ sin 2 ⋅ β − θ − ϕ2 ( β , θ) − ⋅ cos( 2 ⋅ β − θ) − Rhole + b ⋅ sin( 2 ⋅ β − θ)
                                                                    2
                                                                                                                   (               )
      βww := 75⋅ deg                                             initial guess for beta root function below

                           (            (
      βlww( θ) := root polyβww βww , θ , βww          )           )
                                   p
      sleft_point_wall_wall ( θ) := ⋅ cos( θ) − R⋅ sin βlww( θ)
                                   2
                                                                           (               )

  Size of the left portion of the target area assuming deflection off the rail and then the far point with a two-wall rattle

                                                                      ⋅  sleft_point_wall_wall −θrail( θ) +                     ⋅ sin( θ) − R⋅ cos( 45⋅ deg − θ) 
                                                  1                                                                           p
         d point_wall_wall ( θ) :=
                                        sin( 45⋅ deg − θ) 
                                                                                                         (             )      2                                   
                                                      p
         sleft_rail_point_wall_wall( θ) := ⋅ cos( θ) + d point_wall_wall ( θ) ⋅ sin( 45⋅ deg − θ) − R⋅ cos( 45⋅ deg − θ)
                                          2

  Critical angle between left-rail-point-wall and left-rail-wall-wall
           θ := 38⋅ deg
           Given
                   sleft_rail_point_wall( θ) = sleft_rail_wall_wall( θ)

           θcritical_C := Find( θ)                                    θcritical_C = 38.558 deg

                             (            )
        sleft_rail_point_wall θcritical_C = 1.829                                             (             )
                                                                                  d point_wall θcritical_C = 10.275

        sleft_rail_wall_wall( θcritical_C) = 1.829                                  d wall_wall( θcritical_C) = 10.275

    Critical angle between left-point-wall and left-wall-wall
         θcritical := θcritical_C − 90⋅ deg                                     θcritical = −51.442 deg

         θ := θcritical                         β := βguess( θ)
         Given

                       (                          )
                 polyβ α , p , b , Rhole , β , θ = 0

         β := Find( β)             β = 31.558⋅ deg                                     (
                                                                               β := βl α , p , b , Rhole , θ )             β = 31.558⋅ deg
                                                          − 14
         θ − α + 90⋅ deg − β = 1.908 × 10                        ⋅ deg
         θcritical := β + α − 90⋅ deg                     θcritical = −51.442⋅ deg

                               (        )
         sleft_wall_wall θcritical = 0.841
                          (                                 )
       sleft_point_wall α , p , b , Rhole , θcritical = 0.841

 Critical angle between left-rail-wall-wall and left-point-wall-wall
       θ := 30⋅ deg
       given
              sleft_rail_wall_wall( θ) = sleft_point_wall_wall ( θ)

       θcritical_D := find( θ)                          θcritical_D = 28.167 deg               (           )
                                                                                           θrail θcritical_D = 61.833⋅ deg

                              (
       sleft_rail_wall_wall θcritical_D = 0.945 )                                      (
                                                                         d wall_wall θcritical_D = 0   )
                                  (
       sleft_point_wall_wall θcritical_D = 0.945    )                              (               )
                                                                          βlww θcritical_D = 73.167⋅ deg

 Maximum rail distances and critical angles based on table geometry
                                  p
      d max( L) := L −                        − 2⋅ R
                          cos( 45⋅ deg)

      d max_long := d max( 8 ⋅ 12)                       d max_long = 87.262

      θ := 43⋅ deg

      Given
         d point_wall_wall ( θ) = d max_long

      θmax_long := Find( θ)               θmax_long = 44.058⋅ deg

                          (
      d point_wall_wall θmax_long = 87.262)
                                       p
                              (           )
      sleft_rail_max_angle d max , θ := ⋅ cos( θ) + d max⋅ sin( 45⋅ deg − θ) − R⋅ cos( 45⋅ deg − θ)
                                       2

Size of the target area

       sleft( θ) :=                                 (
                       sleft_rail_max_angle d max_long , θ          ) if (θ ≥ θmax_long)
                                                    (
                       sleft_rail_point_wall( θ) if θcritical_C ≤ θ < θmax_long    )
                       sleft_rail_wall_wall( θ) if ( θcritical_D ≤ θ < θcritical_C)

                       sleft_point_wall_wall ( θ) otherwise

      sright ( θ) :=                                (
                       sleft_rail_max_angle d max_long , −θ           ) if (−θ ≥ θmax_long)
                                                     (
                       sleft_rail_point_wall( −θ) if θcritical_C ≤ −θ < θmax_long    )
                       sleft_rail_wall_wall( −θ) if ( θcritical_D ≤ −θ < θcritical_C)

                       sleft_point_wall_wall ( −θ) otherwise
                                                            (sright( θ) − sleft(θ))
s( θ) := sleft( θ) + sright ( θ)            offset( θ) :=
                                                                        2

                                               θ := −45⋅ deg , −44.5⋅ deg .. 45⋅ deg

                   4

                   3

           s ( θ) 2

                   1

                   0
                                   − 50                       0                        50
                                                              θ
                                                             deg

                   0.5

      offset( θ)       0

               − 0.5

                                     − 50                          0                        50
                                                                   θ
                                                                  deg
  Constant margin of error contour lines

                                  1
             r( θ , ∆θ) :=                  ⋅ s( θ)
                             2 ⋅ tan( ∆θ)

                                                            90

                                                      120         60
                                                            50

                                                            40
                         150                                            30

                                                            30

r( θ , 1.5⋅ deg)
                                                            20

r( θ , 2⋅ deg)     180                                                        0
r( θ , 3⋅ deg)

                         210                                            330

                                                      240         300

                                                            270

                                                             θ
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_3_7_effective_target_sizes_for_fast_shots_into_a_side_pocket_at_different_angles.pdf
title: TP 3.7 - Effective Target Sizes For Fast Shots Into A Side Pocket At Different Angles
topics: technical_proofs, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
technical proof                                                                               technical proof
                                        TP 3.7
                       Effective target sizes for fast shots into
                          a side pocket at different angles
                                         supporting:
                       “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                     http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                    by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE

                   originally posted: 7/4/2003       last revision: 1/28/2008

                       See the general notation presented in TP 3.5

 Assumption: the ball will be pocketed if it rebounds at least to the center of the pocket hole rim after
  three wall rattles, assuming equal angles of approach and rebound on each wall (see figure below)

                                                                                                                α

                           A

                                                                                γ2
                                                D             B

                                                             b
                       α
                   R                                                                                     R

                               γ1

                                                           sleft

                                                −θ

 Ball radius                         Pocket-specific parameters
      R := 1.125                       p: mouth width α: wall angle Rhole: hole radius b:shelf depth to hole

                                                 p := 5.0625 α := 14⋅ deg        Rhole := 3            b := 0.1875
Size of left portion of pocket target area assuming near miss of near point

                               p
    sleft_point ( p , r , θ) := ⋅ cos( θ) − r
                               2

                                          ⋅  ⋅ cos( α) − b ⋅ sin( α) − R
                                   1          p
    D( p , α , b , θ) :=
                           sin( θ + 5 ⋅ α)  2                            

                                          ⋅  − ⋅ cos( θ + 4 ⋅ α) + b ⋅ sin( θ + 4 ⋅ α) − D( p , α , b , θ) ⋅ sin( 2 ⋅ θ + 10⋅ α) + R⋅ cos( θ + 3 ⋅ α) 
                                   1            p
    A( p , α , b , θ) :=
                           sin( θ + 3 ⋅ α)  2                                                                                                          

                                        1
    B( p , α , b , r , θ) :=                         ⋅ ( A( p , α , b , θ) ⋅ sin( θ + 3 ⋅ α) − r⋅ cos( 2 ⋅ θ + 2 ⋅ α) + R⋅ cos( θ + 3 ⋅ α) )
                               sin( 2 ⋅ θ + 2 ⋅ α)

    γ1 ( θ) := 90⋅ deg − θ                       γ2 ( α , θ) := γ1 ( θ) − 2 ⋅ α

    γ3 ( α , θ) := −γ2 ( α , θ) + 2 ⋅ α                   γ4 ( α , θ) := γ3 ( α , θ) + 2 ⋅ α

Maximum angle where ball can still be pocketed after near miss of near point

      poly( p , α , b , r , θ) := p ⋅ cos( α) − R − B( p , α , b , r , θ) ⋅ sin( θ + α) − r⋅ cos( θ + α)

      θ := 45⋅ deg                     initial guess for root function

      θmaximum( p , α , b , r , θ) := root( poly( p , α , b , r , θ) , θ)

Size of left portion of pocket target area assuming inner wall contact at point
                                      p
      sleft_point_wall ( p , α , θ) := ⋅ cos( θ) − R⋅ cos( θ − α)
                                      2

Critical angle where inner wall contact barely results in pocketing of ball

      θ := 45⋅ deg

      rcritical( p , α , θ) := ( p ⋅ cos( θ) − R⋅ cos( θ + α) )

                                             (        (
      θcritical( p , α , b , θ) := −root poly p , α , b , rcritical( p , α , θ) , θ , θ  ) )

Size of left portion of pocket target area assuming inner wall contact

      r := R

      rleft_wall( p , α , b , θ) := root( poly( p , α , b , r , −θ) , r)
                                      p
      sleft_wall( p , α , b , θ) := − ⋅ cos( θ) + rleft_wall( p , α , b , θ)
                                      2
θmax := θmaximum( p , α , b , R , θ)                 θmax = 50.688 deg

θc := θcritical( p , α , b , θ)                      (         )
                                             rcritical p , α , −θc = 3.358          θc = −36.387 deg

sleft( θ) :=     sleft_point ( p , R , θ) if θ ≥ α

                 sleft_point_wall ( p , α , θ) if θc ≤ θ < α

                 sleft_wall( p , α , b , θ) otherwise

sright ( θ) := sleft( −θ)

s( θ) := sleft( θ) + sright ( θ)

                 sright ( θ) − sleft( θ)
offset( θ) :=
                             2

                         1
 m( ∆θ , θ) :=                    ⋅ s( θ)
                   2 ⋅ tan( ∆θ)

                                                     θs := −θmax , −θmax + 1 ⋅ deg .. θmax

          3

          2

    ( )
  s θs

          1

          0
          − 60                              − 30                      0                      30        60
                                                                     θs

                                                                     deg
                   0.6

                   0.4

                   0.2

            ( )
      offset θs      0

                  − 0.2

                  − 0.4

                  − 0.6
                      − 60            − 30          0          30             60
                                                   θs

                                                   deg

                                             90

                                120                      60

                                             40

                          150                                       30

                                             20

 (
m 1.5⋅ deg , θs  )
m( 2⋅ deg , θs )
                   180                                                    0
m( 3⋅ deg , θs )

                          210                                       330

                                240                      300

                                             270

                                             θs
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_3_8_effective_target_sizes_for_fast_shots_into_a_corner_pocket_at_different_angles.pdf
title: TP 3.8 - Effective Target Sizes For Fast Shots Into A Corner Pocket At Different Angles
topics: technical_proofs, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
technical proof                                                                                                          technical proof
                                                     TP 3.8
                                    Effective target sizes for fast shots into
                                      a corner pocket at different angles

                                                         supporting:
                                       “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                                     http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                        by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                    originally posted: 7/4/2003                  last revision: 1/28/2008

                                       See the general notation presented in TP 3.5
                                See the specific notation and figure presented in TP 3.7

    Ball radius                                Pocket-specific parameters
        R := 1.125                                    p: mouth width α: wall angle Rhole: hole radius b:shelf depth to hole

                                                                p := 4.58125 α := 7 ⋅ deg               Rhole := 2.75          b := 1.125

Size of left portion of pocket target area assuming near miss of near point

                               p
    sleft_point ( p , r , θ) := ⋅ cos( θ) − r
                               2

                                          ⋅  ⋅ cos( α) − b ⋅ sin( α) − R
                                   1          p
    D( p , α , b , θ) :=
                           sin( θ + 5 ⋅ α)  2                            

                                          ⋅  − ⋅ cos( θ + 4 ⋅ α) + b ⋅ sin( θ + 4 ⋅ α) − D( p , α , b , θ) ⋅ sin( 2 ⋅ θ + 10⋅ α) + R⋅ cos( θ + 3 ⋅ α) 
                                   1            p
    A( p , α , b , θ) :=
                           sin( θ + 3 ⋅ α)  2                                                                                                          

                                        1
    B( p , α , b , r , θ) :=                         ⋅ ( A( p , α , b , θ) ⋅ sin( θ + 3 ⋅ α) − r⋅ cos( 2 ⋅ θ + 2 ⋅ α) + R⋅ cos( θ + 3 ⋅ α) )
                               sin( 2 ⋅ θ + 2 ⋅ α)

    γ1 ( θ) := 90⋅ deg − θ                      γ2 ( α , θ) := γ1 ( θ) − 2 ⋅ α

    γ3 ( α , θ) := −γ2 ( α , θ) + 2 ⋅ α                 γ4 ( α , θ) := γ3 ( α , θ) + 2 ⋅ α

Maximum angle where ball can still be pocketed after near miss of near point

      poly( p , α , b , r , θ) := p ⋅ cos( α) − R − B( p , α , b , r , θ) ⋅ sin( θ + α) − r⋅ cos( θ + α)

      θ := 45⋅ deg                     initial guess for root function

      θmaximum( p , α , b , r , θ) := root( poly( p , α , b , r , θ) , θ)
Size of left portion of pocket target area assuming inner wall contact at point
                                      p
      sleft_point_wall ( p , α , θ) := ⋅ cos( θ) − R⋅ cos( θ − α)
                                      2

Critical angle where inner wall contact barely results in pocketing of ball

      θ := 45⋅ deg

      rcritical( p , α , θ) := ( p ⋅ cos( θ) − R⋅ cos( θ + α) )

                                              (    (                              ) )
      θcritical( p , α , b , θ) := −root poly p , α , b , rcritical( p , α , θ) , θ , θ

Size of left portion of pocket target area assuming inner wall contact

      r := R

      rleft_wall( p , α , b , θ) := root( poly( p , α , b , r , −θ) , r)
                                      p
      sleft_wall( p , α , b , θ) := − ⋅ cos( θ) + rleft_wall( p , α , b , θ)
                                      2

    θmax := θmaximum( p , α , b , R , θ)                  θmax = 59.841 deg

    θc := θcritical( p , α , b , θ)                       (         )
                                                  rcritical p , α , −θc = 2.231           θc = −52.226 deg

    sleft( θ) :=    sleft_point ( p , R , θ) if θ ≥ α

                    sleft_point_wall ( p , α , θ) if θc ≤ θ < α

                    sleft_wall( p , α , b , θ) otherwise

    sright ( θ) := sleft( −θ)

    s( θ) := sleft( θ) + sright ( θ)

                    sright ( θ) − sleft( θ)
    offset( θ) :=
                                2

                           1
    m( ∆θ , θ) :=                   ⋅ s( θ)
                     2 ⋅ tan( ∆θ)
                       θ := −45⋅ deg , −44⋅ deg .. 45⋅ deg

         3

         2

s ( θ)

         1

         0
         − 50   − 25                         0               25   50
                                             θ
                                            deg
                                     90

                               120         60
                                     40

                         150         30          30

                                     20
m( 1.5⋅ deg , θ)

m( 2⋅ deg , θ)     180                                 0
m( 3⋅ deg , θ)

                         210                     330

                               240         300

                                     270

                                      θ
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_4_1_distance_required_for_stun_and_normal_roll_to_develop.pdf
title: TP_4-1
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
TP 4.1
                 Distance required for stun and normal roll to develop
                                                 supporting:
                              “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                         http://billiards.colostate.edu
                               by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                 originally posted: 7/10/2003                         last revision: 2/26/2014

                                                ts : time for stun to develop over distance ds
               m: ball mass
                                                td : time for sliding to stop over distance d
ω: ball angular speed          ω < 0: bottom spin                  ω > 0: topspin                ω = 0: stun

    The direction of the friction force is as shown when the CB has "overspin" (where ω
    > v/R). Therefore, the constant linear acceleration (negative implies deceleration)
    of the ball can be expressed as:

                                    ⎛v   ⎞ F          ⎛v   ⎞
                          a ＝ −sign ⎜―− ω⎟ ⋅ ―＝ −sign ⎜―− ω⎟ ⋅ μ ⋅ g ＝ −± ⋅ μ ⋅ g
                                    ⎝R   ⎠ m          ⎝R   ⎠

                   with no overspin (ω < v/R):                      with overspin (ω > v/R):

                               ⎛v   ⎞                                       ⎛v   ⎞
                          sign ⎜―− ω⎟ ＝ 1          ±: +                sign ⎜―− ω⎟ ＝ −1           ±: -
                               ⎝R   ⎠                                       ⎝R   ⎠

                            a ＝ −μ ⋅ g                                       a＝μ ⋅ g

                                         Non-Commercial Use Only
Linear speeds at stun ( vs ) and when sliding stops (v'):

                                        vs ＝ v + a ⋅ ts ＝ v − μ ⋅ g ⋅ ts

                                              v' ＝ v − ± ⋅ μ ⋅ g ⋅ td

Constant angular acceleration caused by the moment of the friction force about the ball center:

                                              F⋅R       μ⋅m⋅g⋅R          5⋅μ⋅g
                                      α ＝ ± ⋅ ――  ＝ ± ⋅ ――――       ＝ ± ⋅ ―――
                                               I        2        2        2⋅R
                                                        ―⋅ m ⋅ R
                                                        5
Angular speed when sliding stops:

                                                                  5⋅μ⋅g
                                        ω' ＝ ω + α ⋅ td ＝ ω + ± ⋅ ―――   ⋅ td
                                                                   2⋅R

At time ts , the ball is in stun (i.e., no spin), so:

                                                   −ω 2 ⋅ R ⋅ (−ω)
                                              ts ＝ ―― ＝ ――――
                                                    α    5⋅μ⋅g

This equation applies only if ω<0 to begin with, giving ts >0.

At time td , the ball is rolling without slipping, so:

                                                v' ＝ ω' ⋅ R

                                                                     5⋅μ⋅g
                                    v − ± ⋅ μ ⋅ g ⋅ td ＝ R ⋅ ω + ± ⋅ ―――   ⋅ td
                                                                       2
                                                         ⎛5   ⎞
                                        ± ⋅ td ⋅ μ ⋅ g ⋅ ⎜―+ 1⎟ ＝ v − R ⋅ ω
                                                         ⎝2   ⎠
                                                       2
                                            td ＝ ± ⋅ ―――   ⋅ (v − R ⋅ ω)
                                                     7⋅μ⋅g

for a stun shot (ω=0):

                                                        2⋅v
                                                  td ＝ ―――
                                                       7⋅μ⋅g

Distance and time are related with the following constant acceleration relation:

                                               1       2              1            2
                                   x ＝ v ⋅ t + ―⋅ a ⋅ t ＝ v ⋅ t − ± ⋅ ―⋅ μ ⋅ g ⋅ t
                                               2                      2

 So the distance for stun to develop (with ω<0) is:
                                                                    2
                          2⋅R⋅ω 1           ⎛ 2 ⋅ R ⋅ (−ω) ⎞   2 ⋅ R ⋅ (−ω) ⎛     (−ω) ⋅ R ⎞
                ds ＝ −v ⋅ ―――  − ―⋅ μ ⋅ g ⋅ ⎜――――          ⎟ ＝ ――――        ⋅ ⎜v − ―――      ⎟⎠
                          5⋅μ⋅g 2           ⎝ 5⋅μ⋅g ⎠             5⋅μ⋅g      ⎝       5

                                         Non-Commercial Use Only
And the total distance for sliding to stop and rolling to begin is:
                                                                                         2
                           2⋅v                      1          ⎛ 2                 ⎞
                  d ＝ ± ⋅ ―――   ⋅ (v − R ⋅ ω) − ± ⋅ ―⋅ μ ⋅ g ⋅ ⎜―――   ⋅ (v − R ⋅ ω)⎟
                          7⋅μ⋅g                     2          ⎝7⋅μ⋅g              ⎠

                    2        2                        2           2                   2   2
          d ＝ ± ⋅ ―――   ⋅ ⎛⎝v − R ⋅ ω ⋅ v⎞⎠ − ± ⋅ ―――        ⋅ ⎛⎝v − 2 ⋅ R ⋅ ω ⋅ v + R ⋅ ω ⎞⎠
                  7⋅μ⋅g                           49 ⋅ μ ⋅ g

                                         2        ⎛     2                         2⎞
                             d ＝ ± ⋅ ―――        ⋅ ⎝6 ⋅ v − 5 ⋅ v ⋅ R ⋅ ω − (R ⋅ ω) ⎠
                                     49 ⋅ μ ⋅ g

        for a non-overspin shot (ω < v/R),

                                         2        ⎛     2                         2⎞
                                 d ＝ ―――        ⋅ ⎝6 ⋅ v − 5 ⋅ v ⋅ R ⋅ ω − (R ⋅ ω) ⎠
                                     49 ⋅ μ ⋅ g

           for a stun-drag shot (ω=0):
                                                             2
                                                        12 ⋅ v
                                                   d ＝ ―――
                                                       49 ⋅ μ ⋅ g

 The final ball speed, after sliding stops and rolling begins, is given by:

                                                           ⎛      2                ⎞ 5        2
                 v' ＝ v − ± ⋅ μ ⋅ g ⋅ td ＝ v − ± ⋅ μ ⋅ g ⋅ ⎜± ⋅ ―――   ⋅ (v − R ⋅ ω)⎟ ＝ ―⋅ v + ―⋅ R ⋅ ω
                                                           ⎝    7⋅μ⋅g              ⎠ 7        7

   Note that the final ball speed is independent of the ball and table conditions.
   Also, 5/7 (71.4%) of the final speed comes from the initial translational speed (v),
   and 2/7 (28.6%) comes from the spin component (Rω).

   For a stun shot (ω=0):

                                                          5
                                                     v' ＝ ―⋅ v
                                                          7

 Therefore, the final ball speed, for an initially sliding ball, is always 5/7 of the initial
 speed!

D i      lidi   h li         d        l        d     h           di       ( )      di
                                      Non-Commercial Use Only
        During sliding, the linear and angular speeds change over distance (x) according to:
                                                    2         2
                                              v (x) − v ＝ 2 ⋅ a ⋅ x

                                            v (x) ＝ ‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
                                                     2
                                                    v −±⋅2⋅μ⋅g⋅x

                                             1            2           1           2
                             x ＝ v ⋅ t − ± ⋅ ―⋅ μ ⋅ g ⋅ t         ± ⋅ ―⋅ μ ⋅ g ⋅ t − v ⋅ t + x ＝ 0
                                             2                        2

                                              v − ‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
                                                        2
                                                  v −±⋅2⋅μ⋅g⋅x
                                          t ＝ ―――――――                              (only the "-" solution of the quadratic
                                                    ±⋅μ⋅g                          equation is meaningful" because the
                                                                                   equations only apply during sliding
                                                                                   while the friction force is acting)

                                             5⋅μ⋅g            5 ⎛                            ⎞
                                                                 ⋅ ⎝v − ‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
                                                                         2
                 ω (x) ＝ ω + α ⋅ t ＝ ω + ± ⋅ ―――   ⋅ t ＝ ω + ――         v − ± ⋅ 2 ⋅ μ ⋅ g ⋅ x⎠
                                              2⋅R            2⋅R

Changes in speed and spin over distance with drag shots:

                   μ ≔ 0.2                              typical ball/cloth sliding COF

                                            D
                   D ≔ 2.25 ⋅             R≔―           ball diameter and radius
                                            2

                   vslow ≔ 3 ⋅                      vmedium ≔ 7 ⋅                         vfast ≔ 12 ⋅

                                                        2      ⎛     2                         2⎞
                                    dskid (v , ω) ≔ ―――      ⋅ ⎝6 ⋅ v − 5 ⋅ v ⋅ R ⋅ ω − (R ⋅ ω) ⎠
                                                    49 ⋅ μ ⋅

                                  vskid (v , x , d) ≔ ‖ if x < d        ||
                                                      ‖ ‖               ||
                                                      ‖ ‖ ‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
                                                               2
                                                             v −2⋅μ⋅ ⋅x ||
                                                      ‖                 ||
                                                        else
                                                      ‖                 ||
                                                          ‖
                                                      ‖      ‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
                                                               2
                                                             v −2⋅μ⋅ ⋅d |
                                                      ‖ ‖                 |

                                  ωskid (v , ω , x , d) ≔ ‖ if x < d                                   ||
                                                          ‖ ‖                                            |
                                                          ‖ ‖ ⎛ω + ―― 5 ⎛       ‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
                                                                                  2               ⎞⎞ | |
                                                                         ⋅ ⎝v − v − 2 ⋅ μ ⋅ ⋅ x ⎠⎟ |
                                                          ‖ ‖ ⎜⎝     2⋅R                           ⎠||
                                                          ‖ else                                       ||
                                                          ‖ ‖                                            |
                                                          ‖ ‖ ⎛ω + ―― 5 ⎛       ‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
                                                                                  2               ⎞⎞ |
                                                                         ⋅ ⎝v − v   − 2 ⋅ μ ⋅ ⋅ d ⎠    | |
                                                          ‖ ‖ ⎜⎝     2⋅R                            ⎟⎠
                                                                                                       |
                                                          ‖                                              |

  d    d     h
                                            Non-Commercial Use Only
    draw-drag shots:

                              vslow                                    vmedium                                    vfast
                     ωslow ≔ −――                            ωmedium ≔ −―――                               ωfast ≔ −――
                               R                                         R                                         R

                                            v ≔ vmedium              ωdraw ≔ ωmedium

             dskid ⎛⎝vslow , ωslow⎞⎠ = 1.228                                 ddraw ≔ dskid ⎛⎝vmedium , ωmedium⎞⎠ = 6.686

                                                   dskid ⎛⎝vfast , ωfast⎞⎠ = 19.648

      stun-drag shots:                                                    ωstun ≔ 0 ――

dskid ⎛⎝vslow , ωstun⎞⎠ = 0.737                     dstun ≔ dskid ⎛⎝vmedium , ωstun⎞⎠                           dskid ⎛⎝vfast , ωstun⎞⎠ = 11.789

                                                                  dstun = 4.012

        balls speed vs. distance:                                    x≔0⋅          , 0.1 ⋅    ‥7 ⋅

                                       7

                                      6.5

                                       6

                                      5.5

                                       5

  vskid ⎛⎝v , x , dstun⎞⎠ (    )
                                 4.5

  vskid ⎛⎝v , x , ddraw⎞⎠ (       )    4

                                      3.5

                                       3

                                      2.5

                                       2

                                               0      0.7   1.4     2.1    2.8   3.5   4.2   4.9   5.6    6.3   7
                                                                             x ( )

                                                       Non-Commercial Use Only
      ball spin vs. distance:

                                              15

                                              12

                                               9

                                               6

                                               3
                                                   0

ωskid ⎛⎝v , ωstun , x , dstun⎞⎠ (   ⋅ 60)      0

                                             -3

ωskid ⎛⎝v , ωdraw , x , ddraw⎞⎠ (    ⋅ 60)
                                             -6

                                             -9

                                             -12

                                             -15

                                             -18

                                                       0   0.7   1.4   2.1   2.8   3.5   4.2   4.9   5.6   6.3   7
                                                                               x ( )

                                             Non-Commercial Use Only
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_4_2_center_of_percussion_of_the_cue_ball.pdf
title: TP 4.2 - Center of percussion of the cue ball
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
7/10/03
technical proof                                                                                     technical proof
                                               TP 4.2
                                 Center of percussion of the cue ball
                                                   from:
                               “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                      www.engr.colostate.edu/pool
                                by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                       at impact:                          after impact:
                                                                             v = ωR

                           ^
                           F

                                            R                 a
                                                                                                   ω
                                                                  h

                                                                              rolling without slipping

                                                                                             2            2
                  ball mass: m           ball moment of inertia about its center:     I :=       ⋅ m⋅ R
                                                                                             5

        Horizontal impulse between the cue stick and cue ball:

                      F'

        Linear impulse equals the change in linear momentum:

                      F' = mv                                                  ( 1)

        Angular impulse equals the change in angular momentum:

                      F' ⋅ a = I⋅ ω                                            ( 2)
For impact at the center of percussion, the ball rolls without slipping immediately, so:

         v = ω ⋅R                                                ( 3)

Using Equations 1 and 2 in Equation 3 gives:

         F'       F' ⋅ a⋅ R
              =                                                  ( 4)
         m            I

Using the equation for I above in Equation 4 gives:

              2
         a=       R
              5

Therefore, the center of percussion is at:

                              7          7
         h=R+a=                   ⋅R =        ⋅D
                              5          10
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_4_3_spin_induced_throw_effects.pdf
title: TP 4.3 - English-induced throw effects
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                          technical proof
                                       TP 4.3
                            English-induced throw effects
                                        supporting:
                      “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                http://billiards.colostate.edu
                       by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                     originally posted: 7/3/2003         last revision: 2/2/2009

                                             v't

                                                   v'n
                     object ball speed: v'
                                                         throw angle: 

                                                            ^
                                                           F

                                                    ^
                                                    F

                           cue ball speed: v

                                                                cue ball English: 

   The normal impulse (F') is related to the final object ball speed in the normal direction (v' n ):

                                             F' = m v'n

   From linear impulse and momentum in the tangential direction:

                                        m v't = μ F' = μ m v'n
So the final object ball speed in the tangential direction is given by:

                                        v't = μ v'n

Therefore, the throw angle is given by:

                                             v't 
                                   θ = atan       = atan( μ)
                                             v'n 

 varies with speed and the amount of English. The maximum throw angle occurs
 at slow speeds. Here are typical values for a slow, head-on collision:

                                          μ  0.06

                                     atan( μ)  3.434 deg

NOTE - the analysis presented here is a simplified view of spin-induced throw. To see a
more complete analysis that also considers cut angle, vertical plane spin, and speed
effects, see TP A.14.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_4_4_relationship_between_the_amount_of_throw_and_cut_angle.pdf
title: TP 4.4 - Relationship between the amount of throw and cut angle
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                              technical proof
                                    TP 4.4
            Relationship between the amount of throw and cut angle
                                                  from:
                              “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                            http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")
                                originally posted: 7/3/03         last revision: 12/29/05

                                                     v't

                                                           v'n
                           object ball speed: v'
                                                                 throw angle: θt

                                                                   ^
                                                                  µF

                                                            ^
                                                            F
                                                                         cue ball speed: v

                                           cut angle: θ

   Object ball speed in the normal direction from the coefficient of restitution:

                  v'n = e⋅ v ⋅ cos( θ )

   Assuming that all speed in the normal direction is delivered from the cue ball to the object ball,
    from linear impulse (F') and momentum:

                                           m⋅ v'n
                  F' = m⋅ v ⋅ cos( θ ) =
                                             e
  From linear impulse and momentum in the tangent direction:

                                   µ ⋅ m⋅ v'n
           m⋅ v't = µ ⋅ F' =
                                       e
  so

                   µ ⋅ v'n
           v't =
                     e

  Therefore, the throw angle is given by:

                          v't            µ
           θ t = atan             = atan
                          v'n            e

  µ and e both vary with speed and cut angle. The throw angle does not vary with speed
   significantly. The throw angle increases with cut angle. Here are typical values for a large
   cut angle shot:

           e := 0.92         µ := 0.06

                µ  = 3.731 deg
           atan
               e

NOTE - The analysis above is a very simplified model. For a more thorough analysis that
takes speed and spin effects into consideration, see TP A.14. The results in TP A.14 agree
fairly closely with experimental data for various cases.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_6_1_parallel_midpoint_line_banking_method_geometry.pdf
title: TP 6.1 - Parallel midpoint line banking method geometry
topics: technical_proofs, banks_kicks_rails
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
7/11/03

technical proof                                                             technical proof
                                        TP 6.1
                  Parallel midpoint line banking method geometry
                                         supporting:
                       “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                http://billiards.colostate.edu
                        by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                                            d

                                                  θ     θ

                           midpoint               x
                         (x = y) from
                       similar triangles
                        with d and 2d
                                                             y

                                              d             d
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_6_2_mirror_image_kick_shot_method_geometry.pdf
title: TP 6.2 - Mirror image kick shot method geometry
topics: technical_proofs, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
7/11/03

technical proof                                                         technical proof
                                  TP 6.2
                  Mirror image kick shot method geometry
                                     supporting:
                   “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                           http://billiards.colostate.edu
                    by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                              mirror image
                                              of object ball

                                         θ
                                                 α             d

                                                 α             d
                                   θ     θ

                                             α = 90° − θ
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_6_3_increase_in_bank_rebound_angle_due_to_the_rail_coefficient_of_restitution.pdf
title: TP 6.3 - Increase in bank rebound angle due to the rail coefficient of restitution
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, banks_kicks_rails
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
7/11/03

 technical proof                                                                         technical proof
                               TP 6.3
Increase in bank rebound angle due to the rail coefficient of restitution
                                             supporting:
                           “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                       http://billiards.colostate.edu
                             by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                                   vt
                                            vn                               v'n = evn

                                                       θa        θr

                                       v

              Neglecting friction,

                       v't = v t

              From the coefficient of restitution,

                       v'n = e⋅ v n

              Approach angle:                               Rebound angle:

                                    vt                                        v't 
                       θ a = atan                                    θ r = atan
                                    vn                                        v'n 

              Because e < 1,

                       v'n < v n                 and              θr > θa
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_7_1_two_rail_parallel_line_kick_shot_geometry.pdf
title: TP 7.1 - Two-rail parallel line kick shot geometry
topics: technical_proofs, banks_kicks_rails
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
7/11/03
technical proof                                                         technical proof
                                   TP 7.1
                  Two-rail parallel line kick shot geometry
                                       from:
                   “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                           http://billiards.colostate.edu
                    by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                                         θin
                                       θin        θin

                                                   θin

                               θin
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_7_2_corner_5_three_rail_diamond_system_formulas.pdf
title: TP 7.2 - Corner-5 three-rail diamond system formulas
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
TP 7.2
                   Corner-5 three-rail diamond system formulas
                                                 from:
                           “The Illustrate Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                       billiards.colostate.edu
                              by David G. Alciatore PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

                         first posted: 7/11/2003            last edited: 9/2/2014

     The Corner-5 diamond system is a formula-based method that can be used to aim multiple-
rail kick shots. Unlike with some other bank and kick shot systems, you use running English and
aim directly through the diamonds. The figure below illustrates the traditional Corner-5 diamond
numbering system with an example.

                                            first rail number (F)
                   7          6            5            4        3         2        1

8

                             fast                                                         second
7                            medium                                                         rail
                             slow

6

                   7          6            5           4        3    2.5   2        1
                                            third rail number (T)
          5        4.5        4            3.5        3        2.5         2        1.5
                                      originating direction number (D)

                         Traditional Corner-5 diamond numbering system

    The formula for the traditional numbering system is:

                                                     T=D−F

For the ball path shown in the figure above, the originating direction number (D) is 4.5 and the
first rail number (F) is 2. Therefore, the ball heads toward the third rail number (T) of 2.5
because:

                                                2.5 = 4.5 – 2

     The figure below is an alternative numbering system, where the originating direction numbers
(D’) are the same as the third rail numbers (T). This offers the advantage of not having to keep
track of two different numbering systems for the same rail. Also, no fractions (3.g., 1.5, 2.5, etc.)
are required in the numbering. The formula for alternative number system:

                                              T = D’/2 − F + 1

The price we pay in simplifying the numbering system is a slightly more complicated formula.
There are no free lunches in this world. For the example in the figure, the originating direction
number (D’) is 7 and the first rail number (F) is 2. Therefore, the ball heads toward the third rail
number (T) of 2.5 since:

                                    2.5 = 7/2 – 2 + 1 = 3.5 – 2 + 1

                                        first rail number (F)
                  7         6          5         4          3         2         1

14

                                                                                             second
12                         fast
                                                                                               rail
                           medium
                           slow

10

         8        7         6          5         4          3   2.5   2         1
                third rail number (T), alternative originating direction number (D’)

                            Alternative Corner-5 numbering system

    The figure below shows an example where the originating direction is from the end rail where
the numbering is slightly different. For the traditional numbering method, the originating direction
number (D) is 6 and the first rail number (F) is 3. Therefore, the ball heads toward the third rail
number (T) of 3 since:

                                                3=6–3

With the alternative numbering system, the originating direction number (D’) is 10 and the first rail
number (F) is still 3. We get the same result for the third rail number (T) of 3:

                                     3 = 10/2 – 3 + 1 = 5 – 3 + 1
                             first rail number (F)
             7     6        5            4        3       2   1

8 14

                                                                    second
7   12                                                                rail

6 10

         8   7     6        5         4          3        2   1

         5   4.5   4        3.5        3        2.5       2   1.5
                       originating direction number (D)

                   Example originating from the end rail
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_7_3_ball_rail_interaction_and_the_effects_on_vertical_plane_spin.pdf
title: TP 7.3 - Ball-rail interaction and the effects on vertical plane spin
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
7/11/03

technical proof                                                                                                               technical proof
                                       TP 7.3
            Ball-rail interaction and the effects on vertical plane spin
                                                       supporting:
                                     “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                                 http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                      by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                        at impact:                                                        after impact:
      a: distance of
    rail impact height                                                                                                  '
  above the ball center

                                                                                  ^
                  v                                                               F                v'

                                                                         ^
                                                                        F

   Ball properties:
                                                                                      D                      2       2
                      m  6 oz               D  2.25 in                   R                      Io   m R
                                                                                      2                      5

   From the coefficient of restitution:

                  v' = e v

   From linear impulse and momentum:

                  F' = m( v'  v ) = m ( 1  e)  v

   From angular impulse and momentum:

                  μ  F' R  F' a = Io  ( ω'  ω)

   Solving for the ball angular speed after impact gives:

                             F'                          m ( 1  e)  v                           5  ( 1  e)  v
                      ω' =          ( μ R  a)  ω =                        ( μ R  a)  ω =                       ( μ R  a)  ω
                             Io'                           2            2                                       2
                                                                m R                                    2 R
                                                           5
Typical values for different initial conditions

                    ft
         v  5                          e  0.7                        μ  0.17                 a  0.08 R
                    sec

                                                  ft
         v'  e v                 v'  3.5
                                                  s

         For rolling without slipping after impact:
                                  v'                                       rad
                          ω'                              ω'  37.333
                                  R                                        sec

         For rolling without slipping at impact,  = v/R giving:
                          v
                    ω                                                  rad
                          R                                   ω  53.333
                                                                          s
                                  5  ( 1  e)  v                                                   rad
                          ω'                          ( μ R  a)  ω              ω'  3.333                   ' close to 0
                                              2                                                      sec
                                       2 R

         For topspin at impact,  > v/R giving:
                             v
                   ω  1.5                                                                   rad
                             R                                                        ω  80
                                                                                                s
                                  5  ( 1  e)  v                                                     rad                         v'
                          ω'                          ( μ R  a)  ω              ω'  23.333                 0  ω' 
                                              2                                                        sec                         R
                                       2 R

         For stun shot with  = 0, there is no friction impulse and:

                                  5  ( 1  e)  v                                                    rad                     v'
                          ω'                          ( a)                         ω'  18.133                  0  ω' 
                                              2                                                       sec                     R
                                       2 R

         For bottom spin at impact with  < v/R, the friction impulse is in the
          opposite direction and:
                                        v
                          ω  0.5                                                                   rad
                                        R                                             ω  26.667
                                                                                                           s
                                  5  ( 1  e)  v                                                   rad
                          ω'                          ( μ R  a)  ω             ω'  6.267                   ' close to 0
                                              2                                                      sec
                                       2 R
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_10_the_effect_of_bridge_length_on_contact_point_accuracy.pdf
title: TP A.10 - The effect of bridge length on contact point accuracy
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
6/6/05
technical proof                                                                                         technical proof
                                          TP A.10
                  The effect of bridge length on contact point accuracy
                                                   supporting:
                                 “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                            http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                 by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                 angle error                        resulting error in
                                 in cue stick                     cue ball contact point
                                 aiming line
                                                 bridge
                                       ∆φ                                       ∆x

                                                      bridge length (L)

                                                                      ∆φ/2
                                                                                ∆x/2
                                                                 L

        From the triangle above, the possible error in the cue ball contact point depends on
        aiming line accuracy and bridge length according to:

                                                                       ∆φ 
                                             ∆x ( ∆φ , L) := 2 ⋅ L⋅ tan
                                                                       2
                  Example values:
                           ∆φ := 1 ⋅ deg                  the error in the cue stick aiming line is 1 degree
                           L := 1 , 1.25 .. 16            the bridge length is varied from 1 inch to 16 inches

                       0.3

                       0.2                                                 In addition to the aiming line being
                                                                           off, the contact point error (∆x) can
        ∆x( ∆φ , L)
                                                                           produce unwanted English resulting
                       0.1                                                 in deflection (squirt), throw, and
                                                                           curve.
                        0
                             0         5         10         15
                                             L

    ∆x ( ∆φ , 6 ) = 0.105            The contact point error is 1/10 inch for a stroke error of 1 degree
                                     at a bridge length of 6 inches.
     ∆x ( ∆φ , 12)
                      =2             The contact point error doubles when the bridge length is doubled.
      ∆x ( ∆φ , 6 )
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_11_analysis_of_a_common_fractional_ball_aiming_system.pdf
title: TP A.11 - Analysis of a common fractional-ball aiming system
topics: technical_proofs, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                       technical proof
                                      TP A.11
                  Analysis of a common fractional-ball aiming system
                                             supporting:
                           “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                    http://billiards.colostate.edu
                            by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                    originally posted: 6/22/2005     last revision: 9/15/2008

A common aiming system based on fractional-ball aiming claims there are only three different
  aims for all cut shots: a "15 degree cut," a "30 degree cut," and a "45 degree cut." Here, I
show that these aims are equivalent to 3/4-, 1/2-, and 3/4-ball-hits, and I show the 15 and 45
   degree angles are not exact. Also, I show an example shot "in between" two of the aim
references to show a deficiency of the method. The method provides easy visual aiming, and
    it helps a player establish good reference aims for different ranges of cut shots; but for
    "in-between" cut angles, one must adjust or compensate between the aim references.

                               3/4-ball hit:                     “15º cut:"
                       aim the left 1/4 of the CB      aim the right edge of the CB
                       at the left edge of the OB        at the right 1/4 of the OB

                               º                       º

                                                    R/2

                                                      2R

                                                R 2
                                       sin 1      14.48 
                                                2R 

                            Note - the cut angle is not exactly 15 degrees.
          1/2-ball hit:                      “30º cut:"
   aim the center of the CB            aim the edge of the CB
    at the edge of the OB              at the center of the OB

             º                           º
                                R

                                    2R

                                    R 
                        sin 1         30
                                    2R 

        Note - the cut angle is exactly 30 degrees.

        1/4-ball hit:                         “45º cut:"
aim the right 1/4 of the CB          aim the right edge of the CB
at the left edge of the OB             at the left 1/4 of the OB
         º                          º

                              3/2 R

                                    2R

                            3 2R
                 sin 1         48.59 
                             2R 

     Note - the cut angle is not exactly 45 degrees.
                    Example "in-between" shot:

                       1/2-ball
                         hit
 1/4-ball
    hit                                           the OB is on
                                                  the foot spot

  the CB is inside
  the 1st diamond
on the end rail and
 the 2nd diamond
   on the side rail

       The optimal cut angle for this shot is 39.3 degrees, which is
         "in between" the 1/2-ball and 1/4-ball aiming references.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_12_the_relationship_between_cue_ball_spin_and_cue_tip_offset.pdf
title: TP A.12 - The relationship between cue ball spin and cue tip offset
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                     technical proof
                                   TP A.12
            The relationship between cue ball spin and cue tip offset
                                       supporting:
                     “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                 http://billiards.colostate.edu
                      by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                     originally posted: 3/1/05           last revision: 2/5/2009

                                                   

                             ^
                             F
                                                                  b
                                                                          v

                                                R

 Linear impulse results in linear momentum:

                                              Fˆ  mV                                     (1)

 The offset (b) of the impulse about the ball center results in angular momentum:
                                                        2                                 (2)
                                       bFˆ  I          mR 2
                                                        5

 Solving for and equating the impulse from Equations 1 and 2 yields:
                                                5 b 
                                                                                   (3)
                                              v R 2 R

 The term on the left side of Equation 3 is the spin rate factor (SRF), expressed as a percentage
 of the natural roll rate of the ball (v/R). The b/R term is the offset factor, expressed as a
 percentage of the ball radius.

 The typical maximum recommended offset to not risk miscues is approximately:
                                  9
                      b max          in      with          R  1.125  in
                                 16

 which corresponds to an offset factor of:

                                              b max
                                                       0.5
                                               R
      The spin rate factors for various offsets are:

                                                b max 
                                                         0.625 SRF  R  1           
              5 b                                                     2
SRF( b )          SRF( 0  in)  0    SRF                                      SRF b max  1.25
              2 R                               2                  5 
                       stun shot                62.5% of                           25% more than
                                                                   natural roll
                                               natural roll                          natural roll

      The maximum spin rate factor observed in HSV A.98-A.109 (in A.106) was:

                                         SPRmax  1.37

       which, from Equation 3, corresponds to an offset factor (b/R) of:

                                        2
                                             SPRmax  0.55
                                        5
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_13_number_of_lines_of_aim_required_for_different_types_of_shots.pdf
title: TP A.13 - Number of lines of aim required for different types of shots
topics: technical_proofs, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                       technical proof
                                     TP A.13
            Number of lines of aim required for different types of shots
                                          supporting:
                        “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                   http://billiards.colostate.edu
                          by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                        originally posted: 6/27/05         last revision: 5/12/23

                                                                                    p

                                                                      ∆θ

                                                      dp

For a given distance from the pocket (d p ) and a given effective target size of the pocket (p),
the allowable angle error in the object ball path is:

                                                              p 
                                                              2
                                   ∆θ ( p , d p ) := 2 ⋅ atan
                                                              dp 

For an aiming system to cover all possible cut angle shots, the angles between each line of aim
must not be any larger than this allowable error. Otherwise, some shots between the lines of aim
would be missed. Therefore, the minimum number of required lines of aim, assuming the lines of
aim are equally spaced, is:

                                                    90⋅ deg
                                   Nmin( ∆θ ) :=
                                                      ∆θ
Based on Figure 3.37 in the book, the effective target size of a pocket, on average for a slow shot
with access to a full, unshimmed pocket, is:

                                                          p := 3 ⋅ in

Here are some example values for various length shots:

             d p := 1 ⋅ ft            (       )
                                   ∆θ p , d p = 14.25 deg                                 ( (
                                                                                     Nmin ∆θ p , d p   )) = 6.316

             d p := 3 ⋅ ft            (       )
                                   ∆θ p , d p = 4.772 deg                                 ( (
                                                                                     Nmin ∆θ p , d p   )) = 18.86

             d p := 6 ⋅ ft            (       )
                                   ∆θ p , d p = 2.387 deg                                 ( (
                                                                                     Nmin ∆θ p , d p   )) = 37.705

Now, if we only consider cut shots over a certain range (e.g., 7.5 degrees to 52.5 degrees), where we
use only three lines of equally spaced aim (at 15, 30, and 45 degrees), the percentage of cut shots
covered by these lines of aim over this limited cut shot range would be:

                                                                        (
                                                                  ∆θ p , d p    )
                                          (
                                 coverage p , d p :=  )        52.5⋅ deg− 7.5⋅ deg
                                                                            3

If this number is less than 100%, than the three lines of aim do not provide full coverage over the
entire cut shot range (i.e., shots between the aiming lines cannot be made without compensation
or adjustment). If this number is greater than 100%, then the aiming regions overlap (i.e., some
"in-between" shots will be sinkable from two different aiming lines).

             d p := 0.5⋅ ft                       (        )
                                    coverage p , d p = 187.15 %

             d p := 1 ⋅ ft                        (
                                    coverage p , d p = 95 %)
             d p := 2 ⋅ ft                        (        )
                                    coverage p , d p = 47.684 %

             d p := 6 ⋅ ft                        (        )
                                    coverage p , d p = 15.913 %

So with three lines of aim over the limited cut angle range, all shots less than a 1/2 foot from the
pocket will be made, 5% of shots 1 foot away will be missed, 52% of shots 2 feet away will be
missed, and 84% of shots 6 feet away will be missed.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_14_the_effects_of_cut_angle_speed_and_spin_on_object_ball_throw.pdf
title: TP A.14 - The effects of cut angle, speed, and spin on object ball throw
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                                        technical proof

                                                TP A.14
                  The effects of cut angle, speed, and spin on object ball throw

                                                        supporting:
                                    “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                               http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                     by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                  originally posted: 7/15/05      last revision: 5/19/2025

                       See TPs A.5, A.6 and A.8 for background information and illustrations.

   For a cue ball with both vertical-plane (draw or follow) and horizontal-plane (side) spin, the velocity of the
   point of contact (B) between the cue ball and the object ball, at impact is:

                                     
                              v B  v    rB / O  vˆj  ( x iˆ   z kˆ)  R( sin  iˆ  cos  ˆj )                        (1)

   So
                  
                  vB  v Bx iˆ  v B y ˆj  v Bz kˆ   R z cos iˆ  v  R z sin   ˆj  R x cos kˆ                (2)

   Expressing this vector in tangential and normal components (see TP A.5) gives:

                       
                       v B  v Bt tˆ  v Bn nˆ  v Bz kˆ  v sin    R z tˆ  v cos nˆ  R x cos kˆ                (3)

   Therefore, the relative "sliding" velocity vector for the point of contact between the cue ball and object ball can
   be expressed as:

                                                     
                                                     vrel  vBt tˆ  vBz kˆ                                                         (4)

   because the normal (n) component, which creates the impact forces, does not contribute to the relative sliding.

   The friction force on the object ball acts in the direction of the sliding velocity vector:

                        
                        v rel v Bt tˆ  v Bz kˆ       v Bt      
                                                                 ˆ     v Bz     
                                                                                  ˆ                                                (5)
                  eˆ                                       t               k  e  t tˆ  e z kˆ
                        v rel                                                   2 
                                     2
                               v Bt  v Bz
                                               2
                                                   vB  vB   vB  vB 
                                                        2      2         2
                                                     t      z       t      z   
From Equation 8 in TP A.5, the normal impulse between the cue ball and object ball, assuming a perfectly
elastic collision, is:
                                                   ~                                                                  (6)
                                                   Fn  mv cos 

From TP A.6, and using Equations 3 and 5, the maximum possible friction impulse component
that contributes to object ball throw, based on the limitation of friction, is:

                            ~         ~                 mv cos v sin    R z 
                            Ft max  Fn e  t                                                                       (7)
                                                     v sin    R z   R x cos 
                                                                            2                 2

Another limit on the maximum possible friction impulse is based on the requirement that the relative sliding
motion between the cue ball (CB) and object ball (OB) cannot reverse direction during impact. The relative
tangential speed between the balls after impact is given by:

                                                             
                                      vrel  vCBt  CB R  vOBt  OB R                                           (8)

where the v terms on the right side indicate post-impact speed components in the tangential direction and
the  terms indicate post-impact rotational speeds.

In the limiting case, vrel will go to zero during impact (i.e., sliding ceases during impact). In this case, the
maximum post-impact tangential speed the object ball can have is:

                                        vOBt max  vCBt  CB  OB R                                             (9)

From TP A.5 and impulse-momentum principles, the terms in Equation 9 can be expressed as:
                                                                 ~
                                                                 Ftmax
                                                    vOBt max                                                      (10)
                                                                   m
                                                                         ~
                                                                         Ftmax
                                                 vCBt  v sin                                                  (11)
                                                                          m
                                                           ~                       ~
                                                          RFtmax                 5 Ft max                          (12)
                                        CB   z                      z 
                                                       2  2                    2 Rm
                                                        mR 
                                                       5   
                                                                  ~
                                                                 5Ftmax                                            (13)
                                                      OB 
                                                                 2 Rm

Substituting Equations 10 through 13 into Equation 9 yields the maximum possible friction impulse component
that contributes to object ball throw, based on the relative speed kinematics constraint:

                                              ~       m
                                              Ft max  v sin    R z                                         (14)
                                                      7
Using Equations 7 and 14, we can now determine the post-impact object ball tangential speed based on which
effect is the most limiting (friction or kinematics):

                                                                                
                                                      v cos                 
                ~
                Ft                                                            2 
                                           v sin    R z   R x cos  v sin    R z 
                                                               2                                                      (15)
         vOBt      min 
                m                                            1                    
                                                                                  
                                                             7                    

The normal component of the post-impact object ball velocity, using Equation 6, is:
                                                          ~
                                                          Fn
                                                   vOBn      v cos                                               (16)
                                                          m

Now the object ball throw angle can be calculated with:

                                                                    vOBt 
                                                     OB  tan 1                                                   (17)
                                                                    vOB 
                                                                    n

 Typical values for the parameters used in the equations:

            μ : 0.06                         average coefficient of friction between the balls
                   1.125 in
            R :                              ball radius converted to meters                             R  0.029
                       m

                   3  mph
            v :                              average cue ball speed converted to meters/sec              v  1.341
                       m
                       s

                     v
            ωroll :                          natural-roll spin rate
                     R

 Typical speeds (converted to meters/sec):
                            1  mph
            vslow :                            vslow  0.447
                              m
                                 s

                                 3  mph
            vmedium :                          vmedium  1.341
                                     m
                                     s

                           7  mph
            vfast :
                             m                   vfast  3.129
                             s
Model of friction based on Marlow data (Table 10 on p. 245 in "The Physics of Pocket Billiards," 1995)
                                      vd : .1 sin( 45 deg)                             μd : 0.11
                                           1                                                    1

                                      vd : 1  sin( 45 deg)                             μd : 0.06
                                           2                                                    2

                                      vd : 10 sin( 45 deg)                             μd : 0.01
                                           3                                                    3
Note - the Marlow speed data is multiplied by sin(45 deg) to reflect the relative tangential speed component
for the shot in his experiment (which had a 45 deg cut angle).

The friction vs. speed relation seems to follow (or let's assume it follows) a relation of the form:
                                                                                        c v
                                                                  u ( v) = a  b  e

We can solve for the coefficients from the set of data above using:

                     initial guesses:
                                                                                                    1           μd 2  a 
                                    a : μd                   b : μd  μd                c :                ln         
                                               3                       1         3                  vd
                                                                                                         2       b 
                                    a  0.01                     b  0.1                  c  0.98

                   Given
                                                    c vd1
                           μd = a  b  e
                                1
                                                    c vd2
                           μd = a  b  e
                                2
                                                    c vd3
                           μd = a  b  e
                                3
                   a                                                      a   9.951  10 3 
                    b  : Find( a , b , c)                               b 
                                                                                       0.108      
                                                                          
                   c                                                       
                                                                             c                    
                                                                                        1.088      
                                                                       c v
                                               μ ( v) : a  b  e

                        Plot of experimental friction data with theoretical curve fit
                                                   i : 1 .. 3         vv : 0 , 0.01 .. 2  vd
                                                                                                     3

                                    0.15

                                     0.1
                          μdi

                          μ( vv)
                                    0.05

                                       0
                                           0                     5                   10                        15
                                                                      vdi , vv
              MathCAD formulations of Equations 15 through 17, using the above formulation for friction:

                                                v sin( ϕ)  R ωz   R ωx cos(ϕ) 
                                                                       2                     2
              vrel v , ωx , ωz , ϕ :

                                                                        μ  v  v, ωx , ωz , ϕ   v cos( ϕ) 1                        
                                 if v  v , ω , ω , ϕ = 0  , 0 , min rel                                   ,    v sin( ϕ)  R ωz 
                                 
                                        rel     x z                               vrel v , ωx , ωz , ϕ
θthrow v , ωx , ωz , ϕ : atan
                                                                                                                 7
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                v cos( ϕ)                                                   

                                  These two equations describe all throw effects (see the plots below)!

                                collision-induced throw vs. cut angle for various-speed natural-roll shots:
                                                                               ϕ : 0  deg , 1  deg .. 90 deg

                                                  5

                   vslow         
 θ throwvslow ,            , 0 , ϕ              4
                       R         
               deg

                       vmedium              3
 θ throwvmedium ,                     , 0 , ϕ
                           R                
                    deg
                                                  2
                vfast        
 θ throwvfast ,       , 0 , ϕ
                 R           
              deg                                 1

                                                  0
                                                      0           20              40                 60            80
                                                                                       ϕ
                                                                                       deg

                                       BOTTOM LINE: slower speed results in more collision-induced throw;
                                       and the amount of throw increases with cut angle,
                                       but it levels off at higher cut angles.
                                    collision-induced throw vs. cut angle for stun shots at various speeds:

                                                              ϕ : 0  deg , 1  deg .. 90 deg

                                        6

        
θ throw vslow , 0 , 0 , ϕ              4
            deg

        
θ throw vmedium , 0 , 0 , ϕ         
             deg

        
θ throw vfast , 0 , 0 , ϕ   
            deg                         2

                                        0
                                            0           20                     40                 60          80
                                                                                      ϕ
                                                                                     deg

                  These plots can be compared to Bob Jewett's experimental data located at:

                                                      http://www.sfbilliards.com/Misc/throw.gif

                  and with the data presented in my September '06 instructional article. The theoretical plots and
                  experiments agree very closely in both curve shape and throw values.

              BOTTOM LINE: The amount of throw is independent of speed at small cut angles. Throw is
              largest in the half-ball hit range (30-degree cut angle range). At larger cut angles, throw is
              larger for slower speeds.
                                collision-induced throw vs. cut angle for medium-speed shots with various
                                      amounts of vertical plane spin (follow or draw), compared to stun

                                         4

         
θ throw v , ωroll , 0 , ϕ               3
             deg

         
θ throw v , 0.5 ωroll , 0 , ϕ   
               deg

         
θ throw v , 0.25 ωroll , 0 , ϕ 2    
                deg

θ throw( v , 0 , 0 , ϕ )

         deg
                                         1

                                         0
                                             0            20               40               60               80
                                                                                ϕ
                                                                                deg

                                                 BOTTOM LINE: collision-induced throw is greater for stun shots close to
                                                 a 1/2-ball hit (30 degree cut angle).
                                      spin-induced throw for medium-speed straight-on shots (0-degree cut angle)
                                               with various amounts of forward roll (or draw) and sidespin

                                              ϕ : 0                ωz : 1.25ωroll , 1.2 ωroll .. 1.25ωroll

                                                                              (see TP A.12)

                                        4

        
θ throw v , ωroll , ωz , ϕ             2

             deg

        
θ throw v , 0.5ωroll , ωz , ϕ     
                  deg

        
θ throw v , 0.25ωroll , ωz , ϕ         0
                  deg

        
θ throw v , 0 , ωz , ϕ   
            deg
                                      2

                                      4
                                                1                                  0                                    1
                                                                                  R ωz

                                                                                    v

                             These plots are similar to those in Figure 4.4 on p. 42 of Ron Shepard's "Amateur Physics
                             for the Amateur Pool Player," 3rd edition, 1997. However, here, a more accurate model of
                             collision dynamics and kinematics involving friction is used.

                        BOTTOM LINE: spin-induced throw is greatest, and most sensitive to sidespin, with stun shots
                        and for medium amounts of spin.
                                          spin-induced throw for straight-on stun shots (0-degree cut angle) at
                                               various speeds, with different sidepin (English) percentages

                                                                   ϕ : 0                 pE : 100  % , 95 % .. 100%

                                                                            (see TP A.12 and TP A.25)

                                                               side spin = SRF (v/R)             SRF = 1.25 (pE)

                                                          10

                              vslow          
θ throwvslow , 0 , 1.25pE              , ϕ              5
                                  R          
                  deg

                                  vmedium          
θ throwvmedium , 0 , 1.25pE                     , ϕ
                                         R               0
                      deg

                             vfast      
θ throwvfast , 0 , 1.25pE            , ϕ
                              R         
                                                          5
                deg

                                                          10
                                                            100                50              0                 50
                                                                                                pE
                                                                                                %

       BOTTOM LINE: spin-induced throw is independent of speed for small amounts of sidespin and largest
       at about 50% sidespin for a slow shot. After a point, more sidespin does not create more throw.
                                 combination of collision- and spin-induced throw for medium-speed
                                    half-ball hits (30-degree cut angle) with various amounts of
                                                    forward roll (or draw) and sidespin

                                                   ϕ : 30 deg        ωz : 1.25ωroll , 1.2 ωroll .. 1.25ωroll

                                                                                 (see TP A.12)

                                        4

        
θ throw v , ωroll , ωz , ϕ             2

             deg

        
θ throw v , 0.5ωroll , ωz , ϕ     
                  deg

        
θ throw v , 0.25ωroll , ωz , ϕ         0
                  deg

        
θ throw v , 0 , ωz , ϕ   
            deg
                                      2

                                      4
                                              1                                 0                                    1
                                                                               R ωz

                                                                                 v

            BOTTOM LINE: For a half-ball hit, throw is greatest for a stun shot with no sidespin or with outside
            spin with a spin rate factor of 1 (see TP A.12). For outside spin with a spin rate factor of 0.5, there
            is no throw.
                                                      combination of collision- and spin-induced throw for
                                           a half-ball hit (30-degree cut angle) stun shots at different speeds and
                                                                  with various amounts of sidespin

                                                                           vfast
                                                ϕ : 30 deg    ωroll :                   ωz : 1.25ωroll , 1.24 ωroll .. 1.25ωroll
                                                                            R
                                                                                                       (see TP A.12)

                                          10

                                           5

        
θ throw vslow , 0 , ωz , ϕ       
            deg

        
θ throw vmedium , 0 , ωz , ϕ         
                                           0
              deg

        
θ throw vfast , 0 , ωz , ϕ   
            deg

                                          5

                                          10
                                                    1                                          0                                     1
                                                                                   R ωz       R ωz       R ωz
                                                                                           ,           ,
                                                                                   vslow vmedium vfast

                  BOTTOM LINE: For a half-ball hit stun shot, throw is greatest with little or no sidespin or with
                  significant outside spin. The amount of throw is most sensitive to the amount of sidespin near the
                  throw-cancelling gearing outside spin point.
             throw vs. cut angle for various types of typical sidespin, slow speed, stun shots:

                                                                         ϕ : 0  deg , 1  deg .. 90 deg

                                                                                   v
                                                       v : vslow         ωroll :                 ωstun : 0
                                                                                   R
                                                                                                                                    v sin( ϕ)
        ωnone : 0                   ωinside : ωroll                    ωoutside : ωroll                       ωgearing( ϕ) :
                                                                                                                                       R

                                                   5

        
 θ throw v , ωstun , ωnone , ϕ   
              deg

        
 θ throw v , ωstun , ωinside , ϕ     
               deg

        
 θ throw v , ωstun , ωoutside , ϕ                 0

               deg

        
 θ throw v , ωstun , ωgearing( ϕ) , ϕ         
                 deg

                                                  5

                                                       0            20                  40                   60              80
                                                                                             ϕ
                                                                                             deg
                                             These plots agree with the qualitative plots in Figure 6-15 on p. 74 of Jack Koehler's
                                             "The Science of Pocket Billiards," 1989.

BOTTOM LINE: Inside spin increases throw at small cut angles. Outside spin reverses collision-induced
throw, and has maximum effect at small cut angles. "Gearing" outside spin results in absolutely no
throw.
  throw vs. cut angle for various types of 25% sidespin, slow speed, stun shots:
                                      v                                  5
       v : vslow            ωroll :          ωstun : 0        SRF :  25%
                                      R                                  4
                                                                                                               v sin( ϕ)
   ωnone : 0          ωinside : SRF ωroll                   ωoutside : SRF ωroll         ωgearing( ϕ) :
                                                                                                                  R

                                                       5
              
      θ throw v , ωstun , ωnone , ϕ   
                   deg

              
      θ throw v , ωstun , ωinside , ϕ     
                    deg

              
      θ throw v , ωstun , ωoutside , ϕ                0

                     deg

              
      θ throw v , ωroll , ωgearing( ϕ) , ϕ        
                      deg

                                                      5

                                                           0           20               40               60
                                                                              ϕ
                                                                              deg

throw vs. cut angle for various types of 25% sidespin, medium speed, follow/draw shots:
                                           v                                5
             v : vmedium         ωroll :          ωstun : 0     SRF :  25%
                                           R                                4
                                                                                                                v sin( ϕ)
    ωnone : 0            ωinside : SRF ωroll                 ωoutside : SRF ωroll         ωgearing( ϕ) :
                                                                                                                    R

                                                       5
              
      θ throw v , ωroll , ωnone , ϕ   
                   deg

              
      θ throw v , ωroll , ωinside , ϕ     
                    deg

              
      θ throw v , ωroll , ωoutside , ϕ                0

                    deg

              
      θ throw v , ωroll , ωgearing( ϕ) , ϕ        
                      deg

                                                      5

                                                           0           20               40                 60
                                                                               ϕ
                                                                              deg
  throw vs. cut angle for various types of 50% sidespin, slow speed, stun shots:
                                      v                                  5
       v : vslow            ωroll :          ωstun : 0        SRF :  50%
                                      R                                  4
                                                                                                               v sin( ϕ)
   ωnone : 0          ωinside : SRF ωroll                   ωoutside : SRF ωroll         ωgearing( ϕ) :
                                                                                                                  R

                                                       5
              
      θ throw v , ωstun , ωnone , ϕ   
                   deg

              
      θ throw v , ωstun , ωinside , ϕ     
                    deg

              
      θ throw v , ωstun , ωoutside , ϕ                0

                     deg

              
      θ throw v , ωroll , ωgearing( ϕ) , ϕ        
                      deg

                                                      5

                                                           0           20               40               60
                                                                              ϕ
                                                                              deg

throw vs. cut angle for various types of 50% sidespin, medium speed, follow/draw shots:
                                           v                                5
             v : vmedium         ωroll :          ωstun : 0     SRF :  50%
                                           R                                4
                                                                                                                v sin( ϕ)
    ωnone : 0            ωinside : SRF ωroll                 ωoutside : SRF ωroll         ωgearing( ϕ) :
                                                                                                                    R

                                                       5
              
      θ throw v , ωroll , ωnone , ϕ   
                   deg

              
      θ throw v , ωroll , ωinside , ϕ     
                    deg

              
      θ throw v , ωroll , ωoutside , ϕ                0

                    deg

              
      θ throw v , ωroll , ωgearing( ϕ) , ϕ        
                      deg

                                                      5

                                                           0           20               40                 60
                                                                               ϕ
                                                                              deg
  throw vs. cut angle for various types of 100% sidespin, slow speed, stun shots:
                                      v                                  5
       v : vslow            ωroll :          ωstun : 0        SRF :  100 %
                                      R                                  4
                                                                                                               v sin( ϕ)
   ωnone : 0          ωinside : SRF ωroll                   ωoutside : SRF ωroll         ωgearing( ϕ) :
                                                                                                                  R

                                                       5
              
      θ throw v , ωstun , ωnone , ϕ   
                   deg

              
      θ throw v , ωstun , ωinside , ϕ     
                    deg

              
      θ throw v , ωstun , ωoutside , ϕ                0

                     deg

              
      θ throw v , ωroll , ωgearing( ϕ) , ϕ        
                      deg

                                                      5

                                                           0           20               40               60
                                                                              ϕ
                                                                              deg

throw vs. cut angle for various types of 100% sidespin, medium speed, follow/draw shots:
                                           v                                5
             v : vmedium         ωroll :         ωstun : 0      SRF :  100 %
                                           R                                4
                                                                                                                v sin( ϕ)
    ωnone : 0            ωinside : SRF ωroll                 ωoutside : SRF ωroll         ωgearing( ϕ) :
                                                                                                                    R

                                                       5
              
      θ throw v , ωroll , ωnone , ϕ   
                   deg

              
      θ throw v , ωroll , ωinside , ϕ     
                    deg

              
      θ throw v , ωroll , ωoutside , ϕ                0

                    deg

              
      θ throw v , ωroll , ωgearing( ϕ) , ϕ        
                      deg

                                                      5

                                                           0           20               40                 60
                                                                               ϕ
                                                                              deg
              Effects of cling/skid/kick at different cut angles:

                              μm: friction multiplier (1: normal, >1: dirty conditions, up to 3: cling/skid/kick)

                                                                              μ  μ  v  v , ωx, ωz , ϕ  v cos( ϕ) 1                         
                                       if v  v , ω , ω , ϕ = 0  , 0 , min m rel                                    ,    v sin( ϕ)  R  ωz 
                                       
                                              rel     x z                                  vrel v , ωx , ωz , ϕ
θthrow v , ωx , ωz , ϕ , μ m : atan
                                                                                                                          7
                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                         v cos( ϕ)                                                    

                    Throw and cling/skid/kick is maximum for a slow, stun shot:

                              v : vslow                 ωx : 0               ωz : 0

                              μ m_normal : 1.0                         μ m_dirty : 1.5               μ m_cling : 2.5

                                                10

          
   θ throw v , ωx , ωz , ϕ , μm_normal      
                    deg

          
   θ throw v , ωx , ωz , ϕ , μm_dirty   
                   deg

          
   θ throw v , ωx , ωz , ϕ , μm_cling           5

                   deg

                                                 0
                                                     0             20                 40                 60                   80                  100
                                                                                               ϕ
                                                                                              deg

                     For stun shots, the maximum amount of throw is normally at close to a 1/2-ball hit (30 degree
                     cut angle); but with clingy conditions, maximum throw occurs at larger cut angles (50-60
                     degrees). For small cut angles (less than about 30 degrees), the amount of throw is the same
                     regardless of the amount of friction.
                 Here's how stun shot cling/skid/kick varies with shot speed:

                                                          10

       
θ throw vslow , ωx , ωz , ϕ , μm_cling        
                   deg

       
θ throw vmedium , ωx , ωz , ϕ , μm_cling              
                     deg

       
θ throw vfast , ωx , ωz , ϕ , μm_cling                   5

                   deg

                                                          0
                                                               0        20        40                    60             80          100
                                                                                             ϕ
                                                                                             deg

                                                                                                                                  v
                   For a slow rolling-CB shot, here's how cling/skid/kick affects shots:                     v : vslow     ωx :
                                                                                                                                  R

                                              10

           
 θ throw v , ωx , ωz , ϕ , μm_normal      
                    deg

           
 θ throw v , ωx , ωz , ϕ , μm_dirty   
                  deg

           
 θ throw v , ωx , ωz , ϕ , μm_cling              5

                   deg

                                                  0
                                                      0            20        40                    60             80         100
                                                                                       ϕ
                                                                                       deg

               For rolling-CB shots, throw increases with cling at all cut angles, and is larger at larger cut angles.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_15_controlling_the_cue_ball_direction_in_a_frozen_cue_ball_shot.pdf
title: TP A.15 - Controlling the cue ball direction in a frozen cue ball shot
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                              technical proof
                                    TP A.15
          Controlling the cue ball direction in a frozen cue ball shot
                                            supporting:
                          “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                      http://billiards.colostate.edu
                            by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")
                          originally posted: 7/29/05       last edited: 3/16/2022

                                                       aiming
                                          target         line                target
                                          angle                               line
                      impact line           
                  (line of centers)

                               n          cut angle    C
                                             
                                                                x

                                                                     B
                                                                                       tangent
                                                                         x               line
                                                                                      t
                                                                    
                                                                                A

                                                                    d

                                                         O

 The cue ball is frozen to the object ball, and we want the cue ball to go in the target line
 direction (e.g., for a carom/billiard shot, break-up shot, or position play). Where do you aim the
 cue stick to have the cue ball head along the desired target line (i.e., what is the correct aiming
 line)?

 A system proposed by Bob Jewett called the "twice as full" or "two-times fuller" system is
 illustrated in the diagram above. To use the method, you extend an imaginary line in the
 impact line direction from any point along the tangent line (line ABC). The necessary cue ball
 aiming line should be the same distance (x) away from the target line (segment BC) as the
 target line is from the tangent line (segment AB). For more information and demonstrations,
 see:

                            billiards.colostate.edu/faq/frozen/aiming/
The system is based on the assumption that frozen balls initially move as one in the normal
direction (along the line of centers), which matches observed ball motion. Here's the
derivation:

From conservation of momentum in the tangential (t) direction (see TP 3.1), the cue ball
tangential speed after impact is related to the inital cue ball speed (v) and cut angle (ϕ) by:

                                              v t = v  sin( ϕ)                                       ( 1)

Assuming the cue ball and object ball move as one in the normal direction, since they are
frozen together, conservation of momentum in the normal direction (see TP 3.1) gives the cue
ball normal speed after impact:
                                                      1
                                             vn =          v  cos( ϕ)                               ( 2)
                                                      2

From Equations 1 and 2 and the illustration above, the angle to the target line (α) is given by:

                                        AB       vn         1       1         1 AC
                            tan( α) =        =        =                  =    
                                        d        vt         2 tan( ϕ)         2 d

Therefore, length AB is half of length AC, hence the equal x's in the illustration. QED!

To experimentally test the system, I used a high-speed camera to shoot super-slow-motion
video clip HSV A.97 at http://billiards.colostate.edu. In the clip, the cut angle is gradually
increased to see how the resulting target angle changes. Here are the data from the
experiment:

                          0 0 
                           13 8 
                           34 20 
                           50 34 
                                   
              M exper   61 46                             0                               1
                                             θexper  M exper                 ϕexper  M exper
                           70 57 
                                   
                           78 67 
                           87 77 
                           90 90 
 Here are the angle relations for the two-times fuller system:

 From triangle OAC,
                                                                                 2x              ( 3)
                                                    tan( 90 deg  ϕ) =
 From triangle OAB,                                                              d

                                                                                 x
                                                    tan( 90 deg  θ) =                          ( 4)
                                                                                 d

 Plugging Equation 4 into Equation 3, and solving for , gives:

                          ϕJewett( θ)  90 deg  atan( 2  tan( 90 deg  θ) )

 Here is the comparison of the system predictions to the experimental results:

                                     θ  1  deg 2  deg  90 deg

               100

                80

    ϕJewett ( θ) 60

       deg

   ϕexper
                40

                20

                 0
                      0              20               40                    60        80   100
                                                           θ
                                                                 θexper
                                                           deg

As you can see, the system matches the experimental results fairly closely over a fairly wide
range of target angles.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_16_final_ball_speeds_distances_and_directions_for_natural_roll_shots.pdf
title: TP A.16 - Final ball speeds, distances, and directions for natural roll shots
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                     technical proof
                                 TP A.16
   Final ball speeds, distances, and directions for natural roll shots
                                          supporting:
                        “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                     http://billiards.colostate.edu
                         by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                     originally posted: 8/2/05                       last revision: 4/3/2013

                  See TP 3.1, TP 3.2, and TP A.4 for background and illustrations.

                                          For a stun shot, see TP 3.2.

      From TP 3.2 and TP 4.1, the final object ball (OB) speed, given the initial cue ball (CB) speed
      v and the the cut angle  is:
                                                      5
                                       v OB( v ϕ)  v  cos( ϕ)
                                                      7

      Note: OB spin-transfer and swerve effects (see TP A.24) are being neglected here (because
      the effects are so small).

      From TP A.4, the velocity components for the cue ball after post-impact rolling begins
      (i.e., after sliding and curving ceases) is:
                                                       5
                                       v CBx( v ϕ)   v  sin( ϕ)  cos( ϕ)
                                                       7

                                         v CBy( v ϕ) 
                                                            1
                                                            7
                                                                              2
                                                                 5  v  sin( ϕ)  2  v   

      Therefore, the final cue ball speed is:
                                                                       2                        2
                                    v CB( v ϕ)    v CBx( v ϕ)  v CBy( v ϕ)

      From TP 3.3, the cut angle and ball-hit fraction are related by:
                              f ( ϕ)  1  sin( ϕ)                   ϕ( f )  asin( 1  f )

      For example, for a 1/2-ball hit,

                              ϕ
                                    1
                                   30 deg                        f ( 30 deg)  50 %
                               2
   Here are the final rolling cue ball and object ball speeds vs. cut angle and ball-hit fraction, as
   compared to the orginal rolling cue ball speed:

                                       v  100%        ϕp  0  deg 1  deg  90 deg

                    100

                     80

        
 vOB v ϕp      60
        %

        
 vCB v ϕp     
        %            40

                     20

                         0
                             0        20           40            60                80        100
                                                          
                                                        f ϕp

                                                         %

                100

                    80

    
vOB v ϕp    60
    %

    
vCB v ϕp  
    %               40

                    20

                     0
                         0       15         30          45            60            75       90
                                                        ϕp

                                                        deg
               For a 1/2-ball hit:
                                                      ϕ  30 deg

                                 v OB( v ϕ)  61.859 %       v CB( v ϕ)  55.787 %

               The cut angle and ball-hit fraction resulting in equal final ball speeds, under ideal
               conditions are:

                                        Given
                                                v OB( v ϕ) = v CB( v ϕ)

                                        ϕequal  Find( ϕ)

                                        ϕequal  33.211 deg                         
                                                                          f ϕequal  45.228 %

  With constant rolling resistance, a rolling ball's travel distance is proportional to the square of the
  speed (as in TP 4.1); so the approximate relative distances traveled by each ball, compared to the
  distance the rolling cue ball would travel without collision (dmax), is:

v  100%                              
                  d OB( v φ)  v OB( v φ)        2                          
                                                             d CB( v φ)  v CB( v φ)      2   d max  d CB( v 90 deg)

                           100

                            80

              
         dOB v ϕp    
                            60
            dmax %

              
         dCB v ϕp    
                            40
            dmax  %

                            20

                             0
                                 0               20                  40                   60          80               100
                                                                                
                                                                               f ϕp

                                                                                %
                              100

                               80

                    
                dOB v ϕp    60
                    %

                    
                dCB v ϕp
                    %          40

                               20

                                0
                                    0               15             30              45             60             75            90
                                                                                   ϕp

                                                                                   deg

  Ideally, the ball speeds and distances traveled are the same at a little less than a 1/2-ball
  hit, which is slightly more than a 30-degree cut angle.

  For a full-ball hit (100% hit or 0-degree cut angle), the post-impact, final rolling-ball speeds, as
  compared to the initial cue ball rolling speed are:
                                            2                                                                5
         v CB( v 0 )  28.571 %               28.571 %                      v OB( v 0 )  71.429 %        71.429 %
                                            7                                                                7

  It is clear from the equations at the top of this document where these proportions come from.

  The ball travel distances, as compared to how far the initial rolling cue ball would travel are:

d CB( v 0 )                                                 d OB( v 0 )
                                                                                             5   51.02  % d OB( v 0)  6.25
                                        2                                                        2
                                 2   8.163  %
                 8.163  %                                                  51.02  %    
  d max                         7                              d max                      7               d CB( v 0 )

  So if a rolling cue ball hits an object ball squarely, the object ball will ideally travel a little
  more than 6 times farther than the cue ball after impact.

  See the end of this document for graphs and distance proportions with non-ideal inelasticity
  and friction taken into consideration.
    Here are travel distance ratios for various ball-hit fractions and cut angles
    (assuming perfect balls):

                               f ( ϕ)  1  sin( ϕ)       ϕ( f )  asin( 1  f )

                                                                                        approximate
                                                                                       OB:CB distance
full-ball hit:                                                                             ratio:
      fx  1                                                       
                                                               d OB v φx
                                          
                                 φx  ϕ fx  0  deg
                                                               d CB v φx 
                                                                               6.25       6.5 : 1

3/4-ball hit:
      fx 
            3                                                       
                                                               d OB v φx
            4                             
                                 φx  ϕ fx  14.5 deg
                                                               d CB v φx 
                                                                               3.44         7:2

1/2-ball hit (30-degree cut):

                                                                    
                                                               d OB v φx
                                          
            1
      fx                       φx  ϕ fx  30 deg                          1.23       2.5 : 2
            2                                                  d CB v φx 

33.5-degree cut:

      fx  f ( 33.5 deg)  44.806 %   φx  33.5 deg            
                                                               d OB v φx
                                                                              1             1:1
                                                               d CB v φx 

1/4-ball hit:
      fx 
            1                                                       
                                                               d OB v φx
            4                             
                                 φx  ϕ fx  48.6 deg
                                                               d CB v φx 
                                                                               0.37         1:2

3/16-ball hit (between 1/4 and 1/8):
      fx 
            3                                                       
                                                               d OB v φx
            16                            
                             φx  ϕ fx  54.3 deg
                                                               d CB v φx 
                                                                               0.25         1:4

1/8-ball hit:
      fx 
            1                                                       
                                                               d OB v φx
            8                             
                                 φx  ϕ fx  61 deg
                                                               d CB v φx 
                                                                               0.15       1 : 6.5
If ball inelasticity and friction are taken into account (see TP A.5, TP A.6, and TP 4.1), the
final speeds and directions can be found with:

                      e  0.94                          coefficient of restitution between balls

                      μballs  0.06                     average coefficient of friction between the balls

                                          5 ( 1  e)
                    v OBn ( v ϕ)                 cos( ϕ)  v
                                          7     2
                                          5 ( 1  e)
                    v OBt( v ϕ)                  μballs  cos( ϕ)  v                           final object ball velocity
                                          7     2                                                     and speed

                                                           2                    2
                    v OB( v ϕ)        v OBn ( v ϕ)  v OBt( v ϕ)

                    ωx0( v ϕ)     μballs  ( 1  e)  cos( ϕ)  1
                                  v 5                                3
                                  R 4                                                  

                    ωy0( v ϕ)     μballs  ( 1  e)  sin( ϕ)  cos( ϕ) 
                                  v      5                                       2                              initial post-impact
                                  R 4                                                                              cue ball
                                                                                                                     kinematics
                                      v
                    v x0( v ϕ)         sin( ϕ)  cos( ϕ)  1  e  μballs  ( 1  e)  cos( ϕ)
                                      2                                                                    

                                      v 
                                        sin( ϕ)  2  μballs  ( 1  e)  cos( ϕ)  ( 1  e)  cos( ϕ) 
                                                2                                                        2
                    v y0( v ϕ) 
                                      2                                                                

                                                         2                  2
                    v CBo( v ϕ)           v x0( v ϕ)  v y0( v ϕ)                       post-impact cue ball speed

                                                                                       
                                          1
                    v CBx( v ϕ)            5 v x0( v ϕ)  2  R ωy0( v ϕ)
                                          7
                                                                                                       final cue ball velocity

                                                                                           
                                          1
                    v CBy( v ϕ)            5  v y0( v ϕ)  2  R ωx0( v ϕ)
                                          7

                                                             2                      2
                      v CB( v ϕ)          v CBx( v ϕ)  v CBy( v ϕ)                          final cue ball speed
            This shows how the final CB speed compares with the post-impact speed
            for various ball-hit fractions:

                   100

                    80

        
vCBo v ϕp        60
        %

    
vCB v ϕp    
    %               40

                    20

                     0
                         0         20               40              60               80              100
                                                            
                                                          f ϕp

                                                            %

                     So the CB picks up a little speed after impact for all ball-hit-fractions, except for a
                     0% ball-hit (90 degree cut angle).

                     To find the final ball angles, we first need to express the x and y components of
                     the post-impact OB velocity (using the diagram in TP A.8):

                                    v OBx ( v ϕ)  v OBn ( v ϕ)  sin( ϕ)  v OBt( v ϕ)  cos( ϕ)

                                    v OBy ( v ϕ)  v OBn ( v ϕ)  cos( ϕ)  v OBt( v ϕ)  sin( ϕ)

                     The final object ball angle (relative to the y-axis) is:

                                                            v OBx( v ϕ) 
                                        θOB( v ϕ)  atan                
                                                            v OBy( v ϕ) 

                     and the final cue ball angle (relative to the y-axis) is:

                                                            v CBx( v ϕ) 
                                        θCB( v ϕ)  atan               
                                                            v CBy( v ϕ) 
   This shows how the final OB and CB speeds vary with different ball-hit fractions:

              100

               80

    
vOB v ϕp    60
    %

        
vCB v ϕp

    %          40

               20

                0
                    0          20              40              60              80               100
                                                       
                                                     f ϕp

                                                       %

         For a 1/2-ball hit:
                                             ϕ  30 deg
                        v OB( v ϕ)  60.111 %                v CB( v ϕ)  53.615 %

         The cut angle and ball-hit fraction resulting in equal final ball speeds are:
                                    Given
                                            v OB( v ϕ) = v CB( v ϕ)

                                    ϕ  Find( ϕ)

                                    ϕ  33.477 deg           f ( ϕ)  44.839 %

                                    v OB( v ϕ)  57.895 % v CB( v ϕ)  57.895 %

         At this angle, the final OB and CB directions are:

                            θOB( v ϕ)  30.044 deg               θCB( v ϕ)  33.409 deg

         So, for about a 1/2-ball hit, the final CB and OB speeds are close to
         equal (about 58% of the original CB speed), and both balls leave at
         about the same angle (about 30 degrees).
The cut angle and ball-hit fraction resulting in equal final OB and CB angles are:

                    Given
                              θOB( v ϕ) = θCB( v ϕ)

                    ϕ  Find( ϕ)

                    ϕ  36.114 deg         f ( ϕ)  41.06  %

                    θOB( v ϕ)  32.681 deg                θCB( v ϕ)  32.681 deg

At this angle, the final ball speeds are:

                        v OB( v ϕ)  56.073 %                 v CB( v ϕ)  61.097 %

So for about a 41% ball-hit fraction (36 degree cut angle), the balls leave at the
same angle, and the final CB speed is a little faster than the OB speed (see
graph below).

                                         ϕ  0  deg 1  deg  90 deg

               80

               60
 θOB( v ϕ)

    deg

 θCB( v ϕ) 40

    deg

               20

                0
                    0           20           40                60            80          100
                                                    f ( ϕ)
                                                     %
To have the final CB and OB speeds and angles match as close as possible, we can
minimize the following function (sum of squares of scaled differences):

                                                              2                                2
                                 vOB( v ϕ)  v CB( v ϕ)   θOB( v ϕ)  θCB( v ϕ) 
                  ERROR ( ϕ)                                                         
                                        v CB( v ϕ)                   θCB( v ϕ)
                                                                                        

          ϕ  30 deg       initial guess
          Given
                   0  deg  ϕ  90 deg
          ϕ  Minimize( ERROR ϕ)

          ϕ  35.081 deg          f ( ϕ)  42.527 %

                          v OB( v ϕ)  56.801 % v CB( v ϕ)  59.848 %

                         θOB( v ϕ)  31.647 deg θCB( v ϕ)  32.99  deg

 So a ball-hit fraction of about 43% (35 degree cut angle) results in the closest
 match of both CB and OB final speeds and angles.
With ball inelasticity and friction taken into account, here's how the ball travel distances
vary with ball-hit fraction (f) and cut angle (φ), compared to the distance the rolling cue ball
would travel without collision (dmax):

 v  100%                              
                         d OB( v φ)  v OB( v φ)   2                       
                                                                  d CB( v φ)  v CB( v φ)   2        d max  d CB( v 90 deg)

                         100

                           80

             
        dOB v ϕp   
         dmax %           60

             
        dCB v ϕp  
                           40
         dmax  %

                           20

                            0
                                0                20               40                 60               80               100
                                                                          
                                                                        f ϕp

                                                                          %

                         100

                           80

             
        dOB v ϕp    60
             %

             
        dCB v ϕp  
             %             40

                           20

                            0
                                0           15               30           45              60               75           90
                                                                          ϕp

                                                                          deg
    Find the cut angle and ball-hit fraction where the CB and OB have equal travel distances:
                 φ  35 deg         initial guess
                 Given
                         d OB( v φ) = d CB( v φ)

                 φequal  Find( φ)  33.477 deg                     
                                                             f φequal  44.839 %

Here are travel distance ratios for various ball-hit fractions and cut angles
(for typical imperfect balls):

                                    f ( ϕ)  1  sin( ϕ)           ϕ( f )  asin( 1  f )

                                                                                                 approximate
                                                                                                OB:CB distance
full-ball hit:                                                                                      ratio:
      fx  1                                                                
                                                                        d OB v φx
                                                
                                      φx  ϕ fx  0  deg
                                                                        d CB v φx 
                                                                                        6.83        7:1

3/4-ball hit:
      fx 
            3                                                                
                                                                        d OB v φx
            4                                   
                                      φx  ϕ fx  14.5 deg
                                                                        d CB v φx 
                                                                                        3.63        7:2

1/2-ball hit (30-degree cut):

                                                                             
                                                                        d OB v φx
                                                
            1
      fx                            φx  ϕ fx  30 deg                              1.26        4:3
            2                                                           d CB v φx 

33.5-degree cut:

      fx  f ( 33.5 deg)  44.806 %        φx  33.5 deg                
                                                                        d OB v φx
                                                                                       1            1:1
                                                                        d CB v φx 

1/4-ball hit:
      fx 
            1                                                                
                                                                        d OB v φx
            4                                   
                                      φx  ϕ fx  48.6 deg
                                                                        d CB v φx 
                                                                                        0.37        1:2

3/16-ball hit (between 1/4 and 1/8):
      fx 
            3                                                                
                                                                        d OB v φx
            16                                  
                             φx  ϕ fx  54.3 deg
                                                                        d CB v φx 
                                                                                        0.25        1:5

1/8-ball hit:
      fx 
            1                                                                
                                                                        d OB v φx
            8                                   
                                      φx  ϕ fx  61 deg
                                                                        d CB v φx 
                                                                                        0.15        1 : 10
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_17_the_effect_of_the_amount_of_friction_on_throw.pdf
title: TP A.17 - The effect of the amount of friction on throw
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
8/9/05
technical proof                                                                                                                          technical proof

                                                             TP A.17
                                          The effect of the amount of friction on throw
                                                                  supporting:
                                                “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                                         http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                                by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                       See TP A.14 for background information and fundamental results.

      Typical values for the parameters used in the equations:

                      µ := 0.06                       average coefficient of friction between the balls
                             1.125 ⋅ in
                      R :=                            ball radius converted to meters                                        R = 0.029
                                  m
                             3 ⋅ mph
                      v :=                            average cue ball speed converted to meters/sec                         v = 1.341
                                  m
                                  s
                                      v
                      ω roll :=                       natural-roll spin rate
                                      R

        Relationship between friction and sliding contact speed (from TP A.14):

                                                                         − 0.77⋅ vrel
                                          ( )
                                      µ v rel :=  0.009951 + 0.108 ⋅ e              

        Relative speed and throw equations from TP A.14:

                  (               )
         v rel v , ω x , ω z , φ :=        (v⋅ sin(φ) − R⋅ ω z)2 + (R⋅ ω x⋅ cos(φ))2
                                                  k ⋅ µ ( vrel( v , ω x , ω z , φ) ) ⋅ v ⋅ cos( φ)                        
                                                                                                                           
                                                 min        v rel( v , ω x , ω z , φ)               ⋅ v⋅ sin( φ) − R⋅ ω 
                                                                         1
                                                                                                     (                   z)
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                           
         θ throw( k , v , ω x , ω z , φ) := atan
                                                                          7                                                
                                                                                v ⋅ cos( φ)                                 

        Note: A scale factor (k) is added to the friction term to see how changes in friction would
        affect results.
                       k less := 0.5                            for half the amount of typical friction

                       k avg := 1.0                             for an average amount of friction

                       k more := 1.5                            for 50% more than the typical amount of friction
    collision-induced throw vs. cut angle for natural-roll shots with different amounts of friction:
                                                                φ := 0 ⋅ deg , 1 ⋅ deg .. 90⋅ deg

                                                        5

                                                        4
            (
    θ throw kavg , v , ω roll , 0 , φ   )
                   deg
                                                        3
            (
    θ throw kless , v , ω roll , 0 , φ   )
                   deg

            (
    θ throw kmore , v , ω roll , 0 , φ          )       2

                       deg

                                                        1

                                                        0
                                                            0         20                 40          60   80
                                                                                               φ
                                                                                               deg

So, for natural roll shots, there is more collisions-induced throw when there is more friction. No surprise here.

           collision-induced throw vs. cut angle for stun shots with different amounts of friction

                                                        6

                                                        5

                   (
          θ throw kavg , v , 0 , 0 , φ      )
                                                        4
                        deg

                   (
          θ throw kless , v , 0 , 0 , φ      )
                                                        3
                        deg

                   (
          θ throw kmore , v , 0 , 0 , φ             )
                                                        2
                         deg

                                                        1

                                                        0
                                                            0          20                 40         60   80
                                                                                                φ
                                                                                               deg

         So for small cut angles, the amount of friction does not affect the amount of throw. However, there is more
         throw with more friction for larger cut angles.
             spin-induced throw vs. sidespin for straight-on stun shots with various amounts of friction

                              φ := 0              ω z := −1.25ω roll , −1.2⋅ ω roll .. 1.25ω roll         (see TP A.12)

                                          6

                                          4

         (
θ throw kavg , v , 0 , ω z , φ   )        2
              deg

         (
θ throw kless , v , 0 , ω z , φ   )
                                          0
              deg

         (
θ throw kmore , v , 0 , ω z , φ       )
               deg                        2

                                          4

                                          6
                                              1            0.5                 0                    0.5             1
                                                                             R⋅ ω z

                                                                                v

     So for small amounts of sidespin, the amount of friction does not affect the amount of spin-induced throw.
     However, with larger amounts of sidespin, there is more throw with more spin (up to a point) and with more
     friction.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_18_distance_required_for_stun_and_natural_roll_to_develop_for_different_tip_offsets.pdf
title: TP A.18 - Distance required for stun and natural roll to develop for different tip offsets
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                               technical proof
                                  TP A.18
Distance required for stun and natural roll to develop for different tip offsets
                                                   supporting:
                                 “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                                 http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                     by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                       originally posted: 8/9/2005                                     last revision: 2/10/2009

       ball size and physical parameters:
                                                          D
                      D  2.25 in               R 
                                                          2
                                       ft
                      g  32.174
                                             2    gravity
                                      sec

                      μ  0.2                    typical sliding friction between ball and table cloth
                                 9
                      b max          in
                                 16               maximum suggested tip offset (see TP A.12)

       typical ball speeds:

                      v slow  3  mph             v medium 7 mph                       v fast  12 mph

       From TP A.12, the forward angular spin () is related to tip offset above center (b) and ball
       speed (v) according to:
                                                                           5 b  v
                                                           ω( b v ) 
                                                                                   2                                           ( 1)
                                                                            2 R

       From TP 4.1, the time required for stun to develop (with b<0) is:
                                                                  ω       2 R ( ω)
                                                         ts =          =
                                                                  α          5 μ g

       Substituting Equation 1 gives:

                                                                5  ( b )  v
                                                        2 R                     b   v
                                                                         2       
                                                 ts =
                                                                  2   R      = R                                          ( 2)
                                                                5  μ g                 μ g
From TP 4.1, the time required for roll to develop is:
                                                                                 2
                                          td = sign( v  ω R)                             ( v  R ω)
                                                                              7  μ g

Substituting Equation 1 gives:
                                                           5 b   2 v          5  b 
                               td = sign 1                             1                                               ( 3)
                                                          2  R   7  μ g     2  R 

Distance traveled is related to time according to:
                                                                      1                2                                          ( 4)
                                                     d = v t             μ g  t
                                                                      2

Substituting Equation 2 into Equation 4 gives the distance required for stun to develop:
                                                                                                   2
                                            b   v           b   v
                                                               
                                   ds = v
                                            R   1  μ g   R  
                                             μ g     2        μ g 
                                                           2
                                                             b       1 b
                                                                   1    
                                                                
                                                       v
                                   d s( b v )                                                                                 ( 5)
                                                      μ g  R        2  R 

Substituting Equation 3 into Equation 4 gives the total distance for sliding to stop and rolling to
begin:
                                                                                                                      2
                               5 b   2 v          5  b  1          2 v   1  5  b 
       d = v  sign 1                    1           μ g                    
                             2  R   7  μ g     2  R  2          7 μ g     2  R 

                                                                      2 v                     25  b  
                                                      2                                        2                           2
                                       5 b  2 v          5 b 
       d ( b v )  sign 1                                               1  5    
                                                                                          b
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                     ( 6)
                                                     1        
                                      2  R  7  μ g     2  R  49 μ g           R 4 R 

With a non-overspin shot, Equation 6 becomes:

                                 2
                                              b                      b  
                                                                           2
                    d=
                               v                            b      
                                28  70    4  20    25   
                       98 μ g            R           R       R  

                                                                    b 
                                   2                                     2
                                         24  50 
                               v                               b
                    d=                                         25   
                           98 μ g                       R        R 

 This equation can be verified at special cases:
               b       2
                                         gives                       d=0                              which agrees with TP 4.2
               R       5
                                                                                           2
              b=0                         gives                                 12v
                                                                      d=                               which agrees with TP 4.1
                                                                               49 μ g
Here are typical values for different types of shots:

        stun-drag shot:                   b  0  in

                             
                d b v slow  0.737  ft                                     
                                                            d b v medium  4.012  ft                                 
                                                                                                        d b v fast  11.789 ft

        draw-drag shots:
                                                                                                             b max                      b
                 half of the maximum recommended tip offset:                                      b                                         0.25
                                                                                                                     2                   R
                                 
                d s b v slow  0.658  ft                                       
                                                            d s b v medium  3.583  ft                                       
                                                                                                         d s b v fast  10.53  ft

                             
                d b v slow  1.073  ft                                     
                                                            d b v medium  5.84 ft                                       
                                                                                                         d b v fast  17.162 ft

                                                                                                                                         b
                                                                                                  b  b max                                 0.5
                 maximum recommended tip offset:                                                                                         R

                                     
                 d s b v slow  1.128  ft                                          
                                                             d s b v medium  6.143  ft                                          
                                                                                                             d s b v fast  18.052 ft

                                 
                 d b v slow  1.312  ft                                    
                                                            d b v medium  7.146  ft                                     
                                                                                                         d b v fast  20.999 ft

        follow shots:
                                                                                                        b max                            b
                 half of the maximum recommended tip offset:                                     b                                          0.25
                                                                                                             2                           R
                                                       
                             sign v slow  ω b v slow  R  1                          at this tip offset, the vertical
                                                                                           spin is less than roll to begin with

                             
                d b v slow  0.305  ft                                         
                                                             d b v medium  1.661  ft                                        
                                                                                                             d b v fast  4.881  ft

                                                                                                                                     b
                                                                                                 b  b max                               0.5
                 maximum recommended tip offset:                                                                                     R

                                                                        
                                                                                            at this tip offset, the vertical
                             sign v slow  ω b v slow  R  1
                                                                                            spin is more than roll to begin with

                             
                d b v slow  0.207  ft                                         
                                                             d b v medium  1.128  ft                                        
                                                                                                             d b v fast  3.316  ft
     Below, we will look at how the distance for stun to develop (d s ) compares to the
     entire distance for sliding to stop and rolling to begin (d). We will also look at
     how these distances vary for drag shots of different cue ball speeds (v) and tip
     offsets (b<0 implies a below-center hit). (Note - see TP A.30 to see how cue ball
     speed varies with cue speed and tip offset.)

              b small  25% b max                                  b medium  50% b max               b large  75% b max

                                    b max             b max
               b  
                                     50
                                               2
                                                       50
                                                                 b max                        
                                                                             v  v slow  v slow  0.1 mph  v fast
                                          20

          
        ds b vslow                     15
               ft

          
        ds b vmedium                
                                          10
                    ft

          
        ds b vfast        
               ft                          5

                                           0
                                               0                  20           40                    60                80     100
                                                                                            b
                                                                                        bmax %

The distance to stun increases fairly linearly with tip offset, and is more sensitive to tip
offset changes at higher speeds:

                                                                            
                                      d s 2 b mediumv fast  d s b mediumv fast
                                                                                      2.939
                            d s 2 b medium v medium  d s b mediumv medium

 Doubling the offset approximately doubles the stun distance, at all speeds:

       
    d s 2 b medium v medium                                                           
                                                                                    d s 2 b medium v fast    
                                  2.222                                                                           2.222
     d s b medium v medium                                                         d s b medium v fast

 Doubling the speed increases the stun distance by a factor of 4, at all speeds:

                    
              d s b max 2  v medium                                            
                                                                                d s b max 2  v fast       
                                                                4                                                4
                        
               d s b max v medium                                                   
                                                                                 d s b max v fast      
                                         15

               
             ds bsmall v              10
                        ft

               
             ds bmedium v          
                            ft

               
             ds blarge v       
                     ft                   5

                                          0
                                                           4           6                         8         10       12
                                                                                             v
                                                                                         mph

 The distance to stun is more sensitive to speed changes at larger offsets:

                                                                                     
                                         d s b large 2v medium  d s b large v medium
                                                                                             1.583
                                     d s b medium2v medium  d s b mediumv medium

Doubling the speed increases the stun distance by a factor of 4 , at all offsets:

     
   d s b medium2  v medium                                                      
                                                                              d s b large 2  v medium  
                                                          4                                                   4
         
    d s b medium v medium                                                                         
                                                                                 d s b large v medium

Doubling the speed increases the stun distance by a factor of 4, at all offsets:

                    
               d s b large 2  v medium                                  
                                                                           d s b medium2  v medium     
                                                                  4                                           4
                        
                   d s b large v medium                                      
                                                                           d s b medium v medium    
                                      20

            
           d b vslow        
                ft

            
           d b vmedium          
                     ft               10

            
           d b vfast    
                ft

                                       0
                                           0       20       40              60    80   100
                                                                   b
                                                                 bmax  %

The distance to roll increases fairly linearly with tip offset, and is more sensitive to tip
offset changes at higher speeds.

                                      20

            
           d bsmall v              15
                 ft

            
           d bmedium v          
                                      10
                     ft

            
           d blarge v       
                ft                     5

                                       0
                                               4        6               8        10    12
                                                                    v
                                                                  mph

  The sensitivity of roll distance to speed change is only a little greater for larger offset hits.
  Here's how the ratio of stun distance to roll distance varies with tip offset
  (it doesn't vary with speed):

     
   d b mediumv fast                              
                                                   d b mediumv medium                                  v  v medium
                            1.63                                            1.63
   d s b medium v fast                        d s b medium v medium

                   20

     d( b v)
     ds ( b v)

                   10

                    0
                        0           20                   40                   60                   80                     100
                                                                 b
                                                              bmax  %

                            d ( b v )                                                                  d ( b v )
b  25% b max                            2.6                 b  50% b max                                        1.63
                            d s( b v )                                                                 d s( b v )
                                                                d ( b v )
                            b  75% b max                                   1.314
                                                               d s( b v )

                                    d ( b v )                                    d ( b v )  d s( b v )
    b  100 % b max                               1.163
                                    d s( b v )                                                                  16.327 %
                                                                                          d s( b v )

  For large offset drag shots, the distance for roll to develop after stun is a
  small fraction (about 15%) of the distance required for stun to develop.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_19_masse_shot_aiming_method_and_curved_cue_ball_paths.pdf
title: TP A.19 - Masse shot aiming method, and curved cue ball paths
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                               technical proof
                                        TP A.19
                  Masse shot aiming method, and curved cue ball paths

                                               supporting:
                           “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                     http://billiards.colostate.edu
                            by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                        originally posted: 9/7/2005            last revision: 5/13/2025

   The cue ball trajectory is based on the equations derived in TP A.4. See TP A.4 for
   Equation number references and background information.

                     initial
                   cue ball              c
                   direction                         final
                      (vyo)  y                    cue ball
                                                  direction
                                                      (vf)
                                 A

                            R                 x                a: offset right of center
                                                               b: offset below center

                                     ~                    R: resting point on the table
                                     F
                                                          A: impact line aim point on the table
                            top view

                             z       ~                    ~         z
                                     F                    F

                                                      

                                                                   b
                                              x                                     y

                             R       A                             R      A
                                a
                           front view                             side view
The cue ball is assumed to be struck in the y direction with the angled impulse as shown
above. From linear impulse and momentum, the initial cue ball speed components, after cue
stick impact, are:
                                                                                                ( 1)
                                        v xo  0
                                     ~
                                     F
                               v yo  cos   ve cos                                       ( 2)
                                     m
where ve is the effective speed of a straight-on impact.

From angular impulse and momentum, the spin components of the cue ball about the x and y
axes, after cue stick impact, are related to the impulse according to:

                                 ~            2     
                                 Fb  I xo   mR 2  xo                                      ( 3)
                                              5     

                              ~                     2     
                              Fa sin    I yo   mR 2  yo                                ( 4)
                                                    5     
Therefore, the initial spin components, using Equation 2, can be written as:

                                                 5ve
                                         xo         b                                        ( 5)
                                                 2R 2

                                              5ve
                                      yo         a sin                                    ( 6)
                                              2R 2
 We can now find the final cue ball direction from Equation 23 in TP A.4:

                                                 5ve
                                                 0  a sin  
                           5v xo  2 R yo                        a sin  
                tan  c                       R                                           ( 7)
                             5v yo  2 R xo 5v cos   5ve b R cos   b
                                               e
                                                           R
 As proved by Coriolis, the final cue ball direction can also be predicted from the geometry
 shown in the illustration above. From the top view, the final cue ball direction can be
 expressed as:
                                                            𝑎
                                              sin(𝜃𝑐 ) =                                       ( 8)
                                                           𝑅𝐴
     From the side view in the illustration above, it can be shown (see the figure below) that:

                                            𝑅𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝜙) = 𝑏 + 𝑅𝐴 cos(𝜃𝑐 ) sin (𝜙)                            ( 9)

     Equation 9 can be rearranged to give:

                                                            𝑅𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝜙) − 𝑏
                                               cos(𝜃𝑐 ) =                                                ( 10)
                                                             𝑅𝐴sin (𝜙)

     Dividing Equation 8 by Equation 10 gives the right expression in Equation 7. Therefore, the
     aiming method proposed by Coriolis is shown to be valid. Note that the friction between the
     ball and the table during cue stick impact is is not accounted for in this analysis, but Coriolis
     also showed that this friction has no effect on the final cue ball direction.

     With typical conditions, the final CB angle usually comes up a little short of the angle
     predicted by the Coriolis method. This could be due in part to squirt and multiple-body
     collision effects associated with jamming the cue ball between the tip and slate.

     Now we can define the cue ball trajectory based on the analyses above and in TP A.4.

NOTE: All parameters are expressed in metric (SI) equivalent values for dimensionless analysis

                   ball properties:
                                  2.25 in                   D
                           D :                       R :                D  0.057
                                    m                        2

                   coefficient of friction between the cue ball and table cloth:
                             μ : 0.2

                   gravity
                                    g
                             g :                                    g  9.807
                                    m
                                        2
                                    s
From Equation 1, 2, 5, and 6 above,
                                                                                                                            5  ve
       vxo : 0                                                                          ωxo ve , b :                            2
                                                                                                                                        b
                                                                                                                          2 R
                                                                                                                             5  ve
                 
      vyo ve , ϕ : ve cos( ϕ)                                                                   
                                                                                        ωyo ve , a , ϕ :                           2
                                                                                                                                          a sin( ϕ)
                                                                                                                            2 R

From Equation 14 in TP A.4,

                                 
             vCox ve , a , b , ϕ : vxo  R ωyo ve , a , ϕ                        
                                                     
             vCoy ve , a , b , ϕ : vyo ve , ϕ  R ωxo ve , b                               

                                                                    vCoyve , a , b , ϕ
                                                                          2                                             2
             vCo ve , a , b , ϕ :         vCox ve , a , b , ϕ

From Equation 20 in TP A.4,

                                                   
                                          2  vCo ve , a , b , ϕ     
                             
              Δt ve , a , b , ϕ :
                                                   7 μ g

From Equations 21 and 22 in TP A.4,

                                                 vCox ve , a , b , ϕ                          
                                 
              vxf ve , a , b , ϕ : vxo  μ  g                      Δt ve , a , b , ϕ                                       
                                                 vCo ve , a , b , ϕ                          

                                                        vCoy ve , a , b , ϕ                                  
                                             
              vyf ve , a , b , ϕ : vyo ve , ϕ  μ  g                     Δt ve , a , b , ϕ                                             
                                                         vCo ve , a , b , ϕ                                 

From Equations 24 and 25 in TP A.4,

                                                                               
                                                            μ  g vCox ve , a , b , ϕ                      t2
                                     
                xc ve , a , b , ϕ , t : vxo t 
                                                                          
                                                              2  vCo ve , a , b , ϕ                  
                                                                                              
                                                                         μ  g vCoy ve , a , b , ϕ                      t2
                                                 
                yc ve , a , b , ϕ , t : vyo ve , ϕ  t     
                                                                                          
                                                                              2  vCo ve , a , b , ϕ               
   From the analysis in TP A.4, the entire cue ball path is defined by:

                                 
               x ve , a , b , ϕ , t :                       
                                            ΔT  Δt ve , a , b , ϕ     
                                                
                                            xc ve , a , b , ϕ , t  if t  ΔT
                                            xc ve , a , b , ϕ , ΔT   vxf  ve , a , b , ϕ  ( t  ΔT) otherwise

                                 
               y ve , a , b , ϕ , t :                       
                                            ΔT  Δt ve , a , b , ϕ     
                                                
                                            yc ve , a , b , ϕ , t  if t  ΔT
                                            yc ve , a , b , ϕ , ΔT   vyf  ve , a , b , ϕ  ( t  ΔT ) otherwise

 From Equation 7 above, the final cue ball angle can be found with:

                  θc( a , b , ϕ) : angle( R  cos( ϕ)  b , a sin( ϕ) )

 Parameters used in plots below:

             T : 5                                          number of seconds to display

             t : 0 , 0.01 .. T                              0.01 second plotting increment

Equation for the final direction:                                           Equation for the ball (for scale)

                                                                                   xball ( t ) : R  cos  
                       t                                                                                   t π
           xf ( t ) :  2
                      T                                                                                   T 2 
                                          xf ( t )
           yf ( a , b , ϕ , t) :
                                      
                                  tan θc( a , b , ϕ)                              yball ( t ) : R  sin  
                                                                                                           t π
                                                                                                          T 2 

various effective impact speeds (in mph, converted to m/s):

                      6  mph                   9  mph                     12 mph
          v1 :                       v2 :                         v3 :
                        m                            m                        m
                        s                            s                         s
These plots show how the ball paths for different shot speeds for two different cue elevations:

                                                                 ϕ : 75 deg                  a : 0.25 R                  b : 0.25 R

                                   0.6

             
            y v1 , a , b , ϕ , t 
            y v2 , a , b , ϕ , t

            y v3 , a , b , ϕ , t 0.4

            yf ( a , b , ϕ , t)

            yball( t)

                                   0.2

                                     0
                                          0                             0.2                        0.4                           0.6
                                                                                                                   
                                                    x v1 , a , b , ϕ , t , x v2 , a , b , ϕ , t , x v3 , a , b , ϕ , t , xf ( t) , xball( t)

                                                                 ϕ : 85 deg                  a : 0.25 R                  b : 0.25 R

                                              0.2

                  
                 y v1 , a , b , ϕ , t         0
                 y v2 , a , b , ϕ , t

                 y v3 , a , b , ϕ , t

                 yf ( a , b , ϕ , t)  0.2

                 yball( t)

                                         0.4

                                                    0                         0.2                        0.4                           0.6
                                                                                                                        
                                                            x v1 , a , b , ϕ , t , x v2 , a , b , ϕ , t , x v3 , a , b , ϕ , t , xf ( t) , xball( t)
This plot shows how ball path changes with cue elevation for given tip offsets and
a given shot speed:

                                        v : v2                     a : 0.25 R                  b : 0.25 R

                                     ϕ1 : 70 deg                  ϕ2 : 75 deg                 ϕ3 : 80 deg

                           0.2
   
  y v , a , b , ϕ1 , t 
  y v , a , b , ϕ2 , t

  y v , a , b , ϕ3 , t

  yball( t)

                           0.1

                            0
                                 0                    0.1                                         0.2
                                                                                                   
                                        x v , a , b , ϕ1 , t , x v , a , b , ϕ2 , t , x v , a , b , ϕ3 , t , xball( t)
Comparison of draw and follow shot swerve for a medium-fast-speed shot under
typical ball and table conditions:
                  6  mph
           v :                    a : 0.5 R cos( 45 deg)              same amount of English for both:
                    m                                                      1:30pm (follow) or 4:30pm (draw)
                     s
           b draw : a                 b follow : a                      same amount of top or bottom spin for both

           ϕdraw : 4  deg                ϕfollow : 3  deg              slightly higher cue elevation for the draw shot,
                                                                           but typical values

    initial aiming line with a typical amount of squirt (2 degrees):
                               t                              xaim ( t)
                 xaim ( t ) :                yaim ( t ) :
                               T                            tan( 2  deg)

                                   2

                               1.5

 
y v , a , bdraw , ϕdraw , t
y v , a , bfollow , ϕfollow , t
                                  1
yaim( t)

                               0.5

                                   0
                                       0                0.05                  0.1                    0.15              0.2
                                                                                                         
                                            x v , a , bdraw , ϕdraw , t , x v , a , bfollow , ϕfollow , t , xaim( t)

The draw shot exhibits more "effective squirt" (the net effect of both squirt and swerve, AKA
squerve) over the shorter shot distances (0-4.5 ft); but, over longer shot distances (>4.5 ft), the
follow shot exhibits more "effective squirt." The crossover distance (4.5 ft) depends on shot
speed and ball/table conditions.

Here are the final cue-ball trajectory angles after sliding ceases and rolling begins:

                              
      θc a , b draw , ϕdraw  2.193 deg                                                        
                                                                   θc a , b follow , ϕfollow  0.784 deg
     Final cue ball angle for various cue stick elevations:

                         a : 0.25 R        b : 0.25 R         ϕ : 0  deg , 1  deg .. 90 deg

                   150

                   100

θ c( a , b , ϕ )

     deg

                   50

                    0
                         0              20                  40             60                   80    100
                                                                 ϕ
                                                                 deg
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_1_half_ball_hit_foot_spot_carom_shot.pdf
title: TP A.1 - Half-ball hit, foot-spot carom shot
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
4/7/04

 technical proof                                                                                          technical proof
                                                   TP A.1
                                   Half-ball hit, foot-spot carom shot
                                                    supporting:
                                  “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                              http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                  by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                               T: table size (6.5', 7', 8', 9')
                                          D := 2.25⋅ in          ball diameter

             T/4                                              T/2
                                                                                                   cue ball offset
                                                                                                from the head spot
                    object ball
                   on foot spot

                                                                aiming
      impact                          D                           line
        line                                                                                x

                   30°                                                           table
aiming                                                                         centerline
  line
                    30°

                                         half-ball hit
                                       (30° cut angle)                   T/4
              deflected
            cue ball path

  For a half-ball hit, the cut angle is 30 degrees:

                                                            D

                                             D/2                               aiming
                                                                                 line

                                                                               30°

                                                                    impact
                                                                      line
From the figure below, looking at the components of line segments perpendicular
 to the bold line,

                                T                   T
           D⋅ sin( 60⋅ deg) =       ⋅ cos( θ ) −        ⋅ sin( θ )
                                4                   4

This equation can be written as:

                                    2⋅ 3⋅ D
           cos( θ ) − sin( θ ) =
                                        T

which can be written as:

                                         2⋅ 3⋅ D
             2 ⋅ cos( θ + 45⋅ deg) =
                                                T

Therefore, θ, the angle of the deflected cue ball path,
 relative to the table centerline, can be found with:

                            6 ⋅ D  − 45⋅ deg
             θ ( T) := acos
                            T 

                                                            θ + 30°
                                            impact
                                              line
                                    θ

                                            T/4                      θ   D
                                                                             60° − θ
                                                    60°

                     T/4
                                                      deflected
                                                    cue ball path
              θ

                                            θ
           From the figure below, the angle to the aiming line, relative to the table centerline, is:

                    φ( T) := θ ( T) − 30⋅ deg

           Looking at the components of line segments perpendicular to the bold line,
                                                T
                     D⋅ sin( 30⋅ deg) =             ⋅ sin( φ) − x ⋅ cos( φ)
                                                2

           Solving this equation for the cue ball offset x gives:

                                              ⋅  ⋅ sin( φ( T) ) − 
                                         1        T                D
                     x ( T) :=
                                  cos( φ( T) )  2                 2

                                                           T/2
         θ + 30°                                                                                                                θ − 30° = φ

                                                                                                x

   30°
                          D                                                       φ
                                               60° - θ
aiming                                                        table                                 φ
  line                                                      centerline

           Here are some data for various table sizes:

                     θ ( 8 ⋅ ft) = 41.709 deg                 φ( 8 ⋅ ft) = 11.709 deg

 x ( 6.5⋅ ft)                    x ( 7 ⋅ ft)                            x ( 8 ⋅ ft)                     x ( 9 ⋅ ft)
                = 2.844                        = 3.199                                = 3.911                         = 4.623
     D                               D                                        D                             D

           These numbers are expressed as the number of ball diameters the cue ball should
            be offset from the head spot for good shot alignment.

            In practice, smaller offsets should be used to compensate for deflection from
              the 30 degree line due to speed. Also, for a half-ball hit, the deflected angle
              is more than 30 degrees (about 34 degrees). On an 8' table, an offset of
              2-3 balls works fairly well for slow to medium speed hits. A larger offset
              is required on a larger table.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_20_the_effect_of_spin_speed_and_cut_angle_on_draw_shots.pdf
title: TP A.20 - The effect of spin, speed, and cut angle on draw shots
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                                      technical proof
                                          TP A.20
                  The effect of spin, speed, and cut angle on draw shots
                                                      supporting:
                                    “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                                   http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                    by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                originally posted: 11/8/05                  last revision: 11/8/05

                   Refer to TP A.4 for the background derivations and illustrations.

 ball geometry:

                         2.25⋅ in                       D
             D :=                               R :=                    D = 0.057                        R = 0.029
                           m                            2

 coefficient of friction between the cue ball and table cloth:
                  µ := 0.2

  gravity
                            g
                  g :=
                          m                       g = 9.807
                           2
                          s 

   time required for the cue ball to start rolling (cease sliding):

                                     2 ⋅ v ⋅ sin( φ)
                                                                                                     2
                                                              2                       R⋅ ω      
                   ∆t( v , ω , φ) :=                 ⋅ cos( φ) +  sin( φ) +
                                          7⋅ µ ⋅ g                                  v ⋅ sin( φ) 

   velocity components when the cue ball starts rolling in a straight line:

                                          5
                   v xf ( v , ω , φ) :=       ⋅ v ⋅ sin( φ) ⋅ cos( φ)
                                          7

                   v yf ( v , ω , φ) :=
                                          1    (
                                              ⋅ 5 ⋅ v ⋅ sin( φ) − 2 ⋅ R⋅ ω
                                                               2             )
                                          7
 the final deflected cue ball angle:

                                            (
           θ c( v , ω , φ) := atan2 5 ⋅ v ⋅ sin( φ) − 2 ⋅ R⋅ ω , 5 ⋅ v ⋅ sin( φ) ⋅ cos( φ)
                                                         2                                       )

 x position of the cue ball during the curved trajectory:

                                                                          µ ⋅ g ⋅ t ⋅ cos( φ)
                                                                                    2
       x c( t , v , ω , φ) := v ⋅ t⋅ sin( φ) ⋅ cos( φ) −
                                                                                                               2
                                                                                
                                                             2 ⋅ cos( φ) +  sin( φ) +
                                                                         2                        R⋅ ω     
                                                                                                      ( )
                                                                                                v ⋅ sin φ 

 x position of the cue ball during and after the curved trajectory:

           x ( t , v , ω , φ) :=       ∆T ← ∆t( v , ω , φ)
                                       x c( t , v , ω , φ) if t ≤ ∆T

                                        xc( ∆T , v , ω , φ) + v xf ( v , ω , φ) ⋅ ( t − ∆T) otherwise

 y position of the cue ball during the curved trajectory:

                                                                 2
                                                         µ ⋅ g ⋅ t ⋅  sin( φ) +
                                                                                    R⋅ ω           
                                                                                v ⋅ sin( φ) 
                                                                                                    
           y c( t , v , ω , φ) := v ⋅ t⋅ sin( φ) − 
                                                2                                                  
                                                                                                  2
                                                    2 ⋅ cos( φ) +  sin( φ) +
                                                                   2                     R⋅ ω 
                                                                                                    
                                                                                    v ⋅ sin( φ)  

 y position of the cue ball during and after the curved trajectory:

                   y ( t , v , ω , φ) :=        ∆T ← ∆t( v , ω , φ)
                                                y c( t , v , ω , φ) if t ≤ ∆T

                                                 yc( ∆T , v , ω , φ) + v yf ( v , ω , φ) ⋅ ( t − ∆T) otherwise

Equation for the tangent line:                                                          Equation for the ball (for scale):

      x tangent_line( t) :=
                                   t
                                       ⋅2
                                                                                                                      t π
                                                                                                x ball ( t) := R⋅ cos ⋅
                                   T                                                                                 T 2
      y tangent_line( t , φ) := x tangent_line( t) ⋅ tan( φ)                                                          t π
                                                                                                y ball ( t) := R⋅ sin ⋅
                                                                                                                     T 2
Plot data:
    φφ := 30⋅ deg                                 cut angle for 1/2-ball hit
               mph
    v := 5 ⋅                                      average speed in mph converted to m/s
                m
                s
                    v
    ω roll := −                                   average natural roll spin rate
                    R

    f_range := 0 , 0.01 .. 1.0                    ball-hit fraction range

    φ( f) := asin( 1 − f)
                                                  cut angle and ball-hit fraction relationships (from TP 3.3)
    f( φ) := 1 − sin( φ)

    SRF_range := 0 , 0.05 .. 1.25                 spin rate factor range (from TP A.12)

    T := 5                                        number of seconds to display

    t := 0 , 0.01 .. T                            0.01 second plotting increment

    various speeds (in mph, converted to m/s), from slow to very fast:

                             mph                        mph                       mph                     mph
                v 1 := 2 ⋅                v 2 := 4 ⋅                v 3 := 6 ⋅               v 4 := 8 ⋅
                              m                          m                        m                       m
                               s                          s                        s                       s

  natural roll follow shot (see TP 3.3):

                                         40

                                                                                                                 30
                                         30

         (
      θ c v , ω roll , φ ( f_range )   ) 20
                    deg

                                         10

                                          0
                                              0               0.2           0.4             0.6            0.8
                                                                                  f_range
natural (reverse natural roll) draw shot:

                                     200

                                     150

   (
θ c v , − ω roll , φ ( f_range )   ) 100
              deg

                                      50

                                         0
                                             0           0.2            0.4             0.6         0.8
                                                                              f_range

       For a 1/2-ball hit:
                    φhalf := 30⋅ deg                        (       )
                                                         f φhalf = 0.5

                       (                         )
                    θ c v , −ω roll , φhalf = 109.107 deg

       Cut angle (and ball-hit fraction) required for the deflected cue ball direction to be
       perpendicular to the original (aiming line) direction:
                        φ90 := 30⋅ deg initial guess (1/2-ball hit)

                        Given

                                     (                  )
                                   θ c v , −ω roll , φ90 = 90⋅ deg

                        φ90 := Find φ90      ( )                φ90 = 39.232 deg              ( )
                                                                                          f φ90 = 0.368

       Amount of draw (spin rate factor) required for perpendicular deflection at a 1/2-ball hit:

                        φ90 := 30⋅ deg                ( )
                                                      f φ90 = 0.5

                        SRF := 1                 initial guess (natural roll)

                        Given

                                     (                          )
                                   θ c v , −SRF⋅ ω roll , φ90 = 90⋅ deg

                        SRF_TYP := Find( SRF)                   SRF_TYP = 0.625

       This will be referred to as a "typical amount of spin for a draw shot. " It is 62.5% of
       the natural roll rate.
                                 various speed 1/2 ball-hit draw shots with typical amounts of spin:

                                                           v1                                  v2                                   v3
                                     ω 1 := SRF_TYP ⋅                ω 2 := SRF_TYP ⋅                      ω 3 := SRF_TYP ⋅
                                                            R                                  R                                    R

                           0.4

 (
y t , v1 , ω 1 , φφ  )     0.2

y( t , v2 , ω 2 , φφ )

y( t , v3 , ω 3 , φφ )
                            0
ytangent_line ( t , φφ )

yball( t)

− yball( t)
                           0.2

                           0.4

                                 0                0.2                    0.4                    0.6                    0.8
                                        (                ) (                   ) (                    )
                                       x t , v1 , ω 1 , φφ , x t , v2 , ω 2 , φφ , x t , v3 , ω 3 , φφ , xtangent_line ( t) , xball( t)
        various ball-hit fraction draw shots with typical amounts of spin:

                                                                      ω := −SRF_TYP ⋅ ω roll

                           Double bisect draw shot aiming system described in Jewett's October '95 BD article:
                                    θ c_bisect ( φ) := 180 ⋅ deg − 4 ⋅ φ

                           Trisect aiming system proposed here:
                                    θ c_alt( φ) := 180 ⋅ deg − 3 ⋅ φ

                                            200
                                                                                      .5

             θ c( v , ω , φ ( f_range) )
                                            150
                          deg

             θ c_bisect( φ ( f_range ) )
                                            100                                                                       90
                           deg

             θ c_alt( φ ( f_range ) )

                          deg                50

                                              0
                                                  0             0.2           0.4             0.6          0.8
                                                                                    f_range

1/4-ball hit:         φ1 := φ( .25)        φ1 = 48.59 deg

                 (             )
            θ c v , ω , φ1 = 57.791 deg                         ( )
                                                      θ c_bisect φ1 = −14.362 deg                   ( )
                                                                                            θ c_alt φ1 = 34.229 deg

1/2-ball hit:        φ2 := φ( .5)          φ2 = 30 deg

             (             )
        θ c v , ω , φ2 = 90 deg                              ( )
                                                  θ c_bisect φ2 = 60 deg                        ( )
                                                                                           θ c_alt φ2 = 90 deg

                     φ3 := φ( .75)         φ3 = 14.478 deg
3/4-ball hit:

        (             )
     θ c v , ω , φ3 = 127.761 deg                         ( )
                                              θ c_bisect φ3 = 122.09 deg                      ( )
                                                                                     θ c_alt φ3 = 136.567 deg

                      φ4 := φ
                                    7
7/8-ball hit:                              φ4 = 7.181 deg
                                   8
        (             )
     θ c v , ω , φ4 = 152.114 deg                         ( )
                                              θ c_bisect φ4 = 151.277 deg                     ( )
                                                                                     θ c_alt φ4 = 158.458 deg

            The trisec system works fairly well over a wide range of cut angles (ball-hit fractions). The
            double bisect system is better for small cut angles (large ball-hit fractions). Both systems are
            poor for large cut angles (small ball-hit fractions), especially the double bisect method.
                      0.4

                      0.2
 (
y t, v , ω , φ1   )
y( t , v , ω , φ 2)

y( t , v , ω , φ 3)
                       0
yball( t)

− yball( t)

                      0.2

                      0.4

                            0   0.2                   0.4                     0.6                         0.8
                                      (           ) (                 ) (                )
                                  x t , v , ω , φ 1 , x t , v , ω , φ 2 , x t , v , ω , φ 3 , xball( t)
           half-ball hit draw shots at various spin rates:

                                                  φφ = 30 deg                1/2-ball hit

                                       120

                                       100

  (
θ c v , − SRF_range⋅ ω roll , φφ   )
              deg

                                        80

                                        60
                                             0   0.2         0.4         0.6          0.8     1   1.2
                                                                     SRF_range

                               75% of typical draw shot spin (25% less than typical):
                                         SRF1 := 0.75⋅ SRF_TYP                     SRF1 = 0.469   ω 1 := −SRF1 ⋅ ω roll

                                                                 (             )
                                                             θ c v , ω 1 , φφ = 81.787 deg

                               typical draw shot spin:
                                         SRF2 := SRF_TYP                           SRF2 = 0.625   ω 2 := −SRF2 ⋅ ω roll

                                                             (           )
                                                        θ c v , ω 2 , φφ = 90 deg

                               125% of typical draw shot spin (25% more than typical):
                                         SRF3 := 1.25⋅ SRF_TYP                 SRF3 = 0.781       ω 3 := −SRF3 ⋅ ω roll

                                                         (           )
                                                       θ c v , ω 3 , φφ = 98.213 deg
                           0.4

 (
y t , v , ω 1 , φφ  )      0.2

y( t , v , ω 2 , φφ )

y( t , v , ω 3 , φφ )
                            0
ytangent_line ( t , φφ )

yball( t)

− yball( t)
                           0.2

                           0.4

                                 0            0.2                     0.4                    0.6                    0.8
                                      (               ) (                   ) (                )
                                     x t , v , ω 1 , φφ , x t , v , ω 2 , φφ , x t , v , ω 3 , φφ , xtangent_line ( t) , xball( t)
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_21_comparison_of_bisector_point_and_double_angle_bisect_draw_systems.pdf
title: TP A.21 - Comparison of bisector-point and double-angle-bisect draw systems
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                   technical proof
                                  TP A.21
     Comparison of bisector-point and double-angle-bisect draw systems
                                                 supporting:
                               “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                          http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                 by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                              originally posted: 11/29/05       last revision: 11/29/05

                  original                                                                O
                   line of                                                                        θ+β
                  centers
                                                                                                                      R
    cut
   angle                aiming                                                            θ
    (φ)                   line                                                                             P
                                                                               2R                       φ+β
                                 change in
      OB                          cue ball                                                    φ                ghost ball
                                   angle                                                                        center
                                    (θc)
                                                                                                       G
                   P

                                                                                          d
          GB
                                                                              distance
                                                                              between
                                                                             CB and OB             β
                                   θ

                        θ
                             bisector                         final cue
                                                            ball direction
       CB

                                                                                          C

                                        ball radius: R := 1.125 ⋅ in

Note - the change in cue ball angle θc (e.g., see TP A.20) is related to the bisector angle θ according to:
                                            θ c = 180 ⋅ deg − 2 ⋅ θ − β
  From the triangle formed by C, P, and the perpendicular from P to OC,

                                R⋅ sin( θ )
            tan( β ) =
                            d − R⋅ cos( θ )

            β ( θ , d ) := atan2( d − R⋅ cos( θ ) , R⋅ sin( θ ) )

  Applying the law of sines to triangle OGP gives:

            sin180 ⋅ deg − ( θ + β )              sin( φ + β )
                                                  =
                            2⋅ R                           R

              φ( θ , d ) := asin
                                        sin( θ + β ( θ , d ) )  − β ( θ , d)
                                                2              

  The double-angle-bisect system (see Bob Jewett's October, 1995 BD article) predicts:

                                  θ
              φdab( θ ) :=
                                  2

    Here's how the methods compare for two different CB-OB distances:
          d 1 := 1 ⋅ ft                          d 2 := 6 ⋅ ft                        θ := 0 ⋅ deg .. 60⋅ deg

                                 30

                φ dab( θ )

                      deg
                                 20
                  (
                φ θ , d1    )
                      deg

                  (
                φ θ , d2    ) 10
                      deg

                                   0
                                       0                  20                     40                 60
                                                                     θ
                                                                     deg

So the two systems agree fairly well for small cut angle shots. There is more disagrement
   at bigger cut angles, especially when the distance between the CB and OB is large.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_22_tips_of_english.pdf
title: TP A.22 - Tips Of English
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                                           technical proof
                                                        TP A.22
                                                    "Tips" of English
                                                supporting:
                              “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                            http://billiards.colostate.edu
                               by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                           originally posted: 5/2/2006                 last revision: 5/2/2006

                                                     contact point
                                                                                         ball radius (R)
                              tip size (t)

                    cue stick elevation (θ)                                                    cue tip offset (x)

                                               tip radius (r)          table clearance (h)

                                                                              R                 α

                                                     r                                              x
                                     β
                                         t/2                              θ                                R
                                                 r

                                                h

                       ball radius:                           tip sizes:                                 tip curvatures:
                                                                                                                 0.705 ⋅ in
                              2.25⋅ in                    tmin := 11⋅ mm                                rdime :=
                       R :=                                                                                          2
                                 2
                                                                                                                     0.835 ⋅ in
                                                          tmax := 14⋅ mm                                rnickel :=
                                                                                                                          2
                                                          tavg := 12.5⋅ mm                              rflat := 1 ⋅ in

                  Geometry (see the drawing above)
                                                                                                 t 
                                                                                                  2  
                        α ( x ) := acos
                                            x
                                                                              β ( t , r) := asin        
                                          R                                                    r 

                        h ( x , t , r , θ ) := R − ( R + r) ⋅ cos( θ + α ( x ) ) − r⋅ sin( θ + β ( t , r) )
 Based on TP A.3, a typical minimum cue stick elevation is about:
          θ min := 2 ⋅ deg

 An average cue stick elevation (for most non elevated shots) is probably closer to:
          θ avg := 4 ⋅ deg

 An average angle for an elevated cue stick is:
          θ elev := 20⋅ deg

 The minimum tip radius possible for a given tip size is:
                     t
         rmin( t) :=
                     2

 Note that even for a large tip, a small tip radius is still possible:

                (      )
          rmin tmax = 0.276 in
                                               which is still smaller than:
                                                                                       rdime = 0.353 in

 The maximum offset that can be applied corresponds to when the table clearance is zero:

            R − ( R + r) ⋅ cos( θ + α ( x ) ) − r⋅ sin( θ + β ( t , r) ) = 0

                                    R − r⋅ sin( θ + β ( t , r) )
            cos( θ + α ( x ) ) =
                                             ( R + r)

            α ( x ) = acos
                               x
                                    = acos
                                              R − r⋅ sin( θ + β ( t , r) ) − θ
                                                                           
                           R                        ( R + r)            
            x         
                = cosacos
                                R − r⋅ sin( θ + β ( t , r) ) − θ
                                                              
            R                          ( R + r)             

                                         
            x max( t , r , θ ) := R⋅ cosacos
                                                 R − r⋅ sin( θ + β ( t , r) ) − θ
                                                                               
                                                        ( R + r)             

 TP A.12 defines the "offset factor" as x/R. The largest recommended offset factor
  (to prevent miscues) is 1/2 (0.5).

 For a large, flatter tip, large offsets (i.e., close to 0.5R) are not possible
  (because the table gets in the way [i.e., h is negative]):

                (
         x max tmax , rflat , θ min   ) = 0.416
                      R
                                                             (                         )
                                                           h 0.5⋅ R , tmax , rflat , θ min = −0.182 in

With a smaller tip with a smaller radius, larger offsets are possible
 (i.e., there is ample table clearance for large offset shots):

                (
         x max tmin , rdime , θ avg     ) = 0.656
                       R
At the maximum recommended offset (0.5R), the table clearance for a small, round tip is:

         h        , tmin , rdime , θ avg = 0.242 in
                R
           2                      
                                               (about a 1/4 inch clearance)
           R                      
         h  , tmin , rdime , θ avg = 6.144 mm
           2                      

With an elevated cue stick, larger offsets are possible, but they are still
 limited by the tip size and radius:

                    (
         x max tmin , rdime , θ elev     ) = 0.809        (                                  )
                                                         h 0.5⋅ R , tmin , rdime , θ elev = 0.57 in
                           R

                    (
         x max tmin , rnickel , θ elev    ) = 0.78        (                                      )
                                                         h 0.5⋅ R , tmin , rnickel , θ elev = 0.532 in
                              R

                    (
         x max tmin , rflat , θ elev   ) = 0.589          (                           )
                                                         h 0.5⋅ R , tmin , rflat , θ elev = 0.219 in
                          R

                    (
         x max tmax , rdime , θ elev      ) = 0.792       (                                   )
                                                         h 0.5⋅ R , tmax , rdime , θ elev = 0.534 in
                           R

                    (
         x max tmax , rnickel , θ elev     ) = 0.76       (                                       )
                                                         h 0.5⋅ R , tmax , rnickel , θ elev = 0.491 in
                              R

                    (
         x max tmax , rflat , θ elev    ) = 0.568         (                              )
                                                         h 0.5⋅ R , tmax , rflat , θ elev = 0.168 in
                          R

 Here are some other values for various cases:

                    (
         x max tmin , rdime , θ avg      ) = 0.656        (                               )
                                                         h 0.5⋅ R , tmin , rdime , θ avg = 0.242 in
                           R

                    (
         x max tmin , rnickel , θ avg     ) = 0.629       (                                   )
                                                         h 0.5⋅ R , tmin , rnickel , θ avg = 0.208 in
                           R
                    (
         x max tmin , rflat , θ avg    ) = 0.459          (                          )
                                                         h 0.5⋅ R , tmin , rflat , θ avg = −0.091 in
                          R

                    (
         x max tavg , rdime , θ avg     ) = 0.639         (                               )
                                                         h 0.5⋅ R , tavg , rdime , θ avg = 0.214 in
                           R

                    (
         x max tavg , rnickel , θ avg     ) = 0.612       (                                   )
                                                         h 0.5⋅ R , tavg , rnickel , θ avg = 0.18 in
                           R

                    (
         x max tavg , rflat , θ avg   ) = 0.446           (                          )
                                                         h 0.5⋅ R , tavg , rflat , θ avg = −0.12 in
                          R

                    (
         x max tmax , rdime , θ avg      ) = 0.621        (                                  )
                                                         h 0.5⋅ R , tmax , rdime , θ avg = 0.187 in
                           R

                    (
         x max tmax , rnickel , θ avg     ) = 0.594       (                                      )
                                                         h 0.5⋅ R , tmax , rnickel , θ avg = 0.152 in
                              R

                    (
         x max tmax , rflat , θ avg    ) = 0.432          (                           )
                                                         h 0.5⋅ R , tmax , rflat , θ avg = −0.149 in
                          R
      From the drawings above, the distance from the centerline of the shaft to the center of the ball is:
                                                                                       x
                                                        c( x , r) := ( r + R) ⋅
                                                                                       R
      Therefore, for a given center line distance, the offset can be found with:

                                                                            R⋅ c
                                                        x ( c , r) :=
                                                                          ( r + R)

        The centerline offset (c) is often expressed as "tips of English" (i.e., as multiples of tip widths):

                                                        ctips( n , t) := n ⋅ t

        Using the equation above, the offset can be related to "tips of English" as:
                                                                            R⋅ n ⋅ t
                                                  x tips( n , t , r) :=
                                                                           ( r + R)

          An alternative measure of the amount of English is the percentage of the maximum
           recommended value (0.5R):

                                                                     x tips( n , t , r)
                                                pE ( n , t , r) :=
                                                                          0.5⋅ R

          Here is a comparison of "tips of English" and actual offsets for various cases:

                                               one tip of English:                         n := 1

                                                                                                     (                      )
                                       x
           (
x := x tips n , tmin , rdime   )       R
                                           = 0.293               (
                                                             pE n , tmin , rdime = 58.622 %)        h x , tmin , rdime , θ avg = 0.556 in

                                                                                                     (                          )
                                       x
           (
x := x tips n , tmin , rnickel     )   R
                                           = 0.281               (
                                                             pE n , tmin , rnickel = 56.152 %  )    h x , tmin , rnickel , θ avg = 0.555 in

                                                                                                     (                      )
                                       x
           (
x := x tips n , tavg , rdime)          R
                                           = 0.333               (
                                                             pE n , tavg , rdime = 66.616 %)        h x , tavg , rdime , θ avg = 0.468 in

                                                                                                     (                          )
                                       x
           (
x := x tips n , tavg , rnickel     )   R
                                           = 0.319               (
                                                             pE n , tavg , rnickel = 63.809 %  )    h x , tavg , rnickel , θ avg = 0.467 in

                                                                                                     (                       )
                                       x
           (
x := x tips n , tmax , rdime   )       R
                                           = 0.373               (
                                                             pE n , tmax , rdime = 74.61 % )        h x , tmax , rdime , θ avg = 0.381 in

                                                                                                     (                           )
                                       x
           (
x := x tips n , tmax , rnickel     )   R
                                           = 0.357               (
                                                             pE n , tmax , rnickel = 71.466 %  )    h x , tmax , rnickel , θ avg = 0.379 in
                                                 one and a half tips of English:            n := 1.5

                                                                                                        (                         )
                                           x
            (
x := x tips n , tmin , rdime       )       R
                                               = 0.44           (                   )
                                                             pE n , tmin , rdime = 87.933 %            h x , tmin , rdime , θ avg = 0.334 in

                                                                                                        (                             )
                                           x
            (
x := x tips n , tmin , rnickel         )   R
                                               = 0.421          (                       )
                                                             pE n , tmin , rnickel = 84.228 %          h x , tmin , rnickel , θ avg = 0.334 in

                                                                                                        (                         )
                                           x
            (
x := x tips n , tavg , rdime       )       R
                                               = 0.5            (                   )
                                                             pE n , tavg , rdime = 99.924 %            h x , tavg , rdime , θ avg = 0.215 in

                                                                                                        (                             )
                                           x
            (
x := x tips n , tavg , rnickel         )   R
                                               = 0.479          (                       )
                                                             pE n , tavg , rnickel = 95.713 %          h x , tavg , rnickel , θ avg = 0.214 in

                                                                                                        (                         )
                                           x
            (
x := x tips n , tmax , rdime       )       R
                                               = 0.56           (                   )
                                                             pE n , tmax , rdime = 111.915 %           h x , tmax , rdime , θ avg = 0.095 in

                                                                                                        (                             )
                                           x
            (
x := x tips n , tmax , rnickel         )   R
                                               = 0.536          (                       )
                                                             pE n , tmax , rnickel = 107.199 %         h x , tmax , rnickel , θ avg = 0.094 in

                                                         two tips of English:               n := 2

                                                                                                        (                         )
                                           x
            (
x := x tips n , tmin , rdime       )       R
                                               = 0.586          (                   )
                                                             pE n , tmin , rdime = 117.244 %           h x , tmin , rdime , θ avg = 0.109 in

                                                                                                        (                             )
                                           x
            (
x := x tips n , tmin , rnickel         )   R
                                               = 0.562          (                       )
                                                             pE n , tmin , rnickel = 112.304 %         h x , tmin , rnickel , θ avg = 0.109 in

                                                                                                        (                     )
                                           x
            (
x := x tips n , tmin , rflat   )           R
                                               = 0.408          (               )
                                                             pE n , tmin , rflat = 81.519 %            h x , tmin , rflat , θ avg = 0.112 in

                                                                                                        (                         )
                                           x
            (
x := x tips n , tavg , rdime       )       R
                                               = 0.666          (                   )
                                                             pE n , tavg , rdime = 133.232 %           h x , tavg , rdime , θ avg = −0.043 in

                                                                                                        (                             )
                                           x
            (
x := x tips n , tavg , rnickel         )   R
                                               = 0.638          (                       )
                                                             pE n , tavg , rnickel = 127.618 %         h x , tavg , rnickel , θ avg = −0.043 in

                                                                                                        (                     )
                                           x
            (              )
x := x tips n , tavg , rflat
                                           R
                                               = 0.463          (               )
                                                             pE n , tavg , rflat = 92.635 %            h x , tavg , rflat , θ avg = −0.039 in

                                                                                                        (                         )
                                           x
            (
x := x tips n , tmax , rdime       )       R
                                               = 0.746          (                   )
                                                             pE n , tmax , rdime = 149.22 %            h x , tmax , rdime , θ avg = −0.196 in

                                                                                                        (                             )
                                           x
            (
x := x tips n , tmax , rnickel         )   R
                                               = 0.715          (                       )
                                                             pE n , tmax , rnickel = 142.932 %         h x , tmax , rnickel , θ avg = −0.196 in

                                                                                                        (                     )
                                           x
            (
x := x tips n , tmax , rflat   )           R
                                               = 0.519          (               )
                                                             pE n , tmax , rflat = 103.752 %           h x , tmax , rflat , θ avg = −0.19 in
  number of "tips" of English for maximum offset (x = 0.5R), using the equations above:

                                                                      ( r + R)
                                                   n max( t , r) :=
                                                                        2⋅ t

           (
n := n max tmin , rdime       )       n = 1.706    (      (                        )                  )
                                                  h x tips n , tmin , rdime , tavg , rdime , θ avg = 0.214 in

           (
n := n max tmin , rnickel         )   n = 1.781    (      (                            )                      )
                                                  h x tips n , tmin , rnickel , tmin , rnickel , θ avg = 0.208 in

           (
n := n max tmin , rflat   )           n = 2.453    (      (                )                   )
                                                  h x tips n , tmin , rflat , tmin , rflat , θ avg = −0.091 in

           (
n := n max tavg , rdime       )       n = 1.501    (      (                        )                  )
                                                  h x tips n , tavg , rdime , tavg , rdime , θ avg = 0.214 in

           (
n := n max tavg , rnickel         )   n = 1.567    (      (                            )                      )
                                                  h x tips n , tavg , rnickel , tavg , rnickel , θ avg = 0.18 in

           (          )
n := n max tavg , rflat               n = 2.159    (      (                )                  )
                                                  h x tips n , tavg , rflat , tavg , rflat , θ avg = −0.12 in

           (
n := n max tmax , rdime       )       n = 1.34     (      (                        )                      )
                                                  h x tips n , tmax , rdime , tmax , rdime , θ avg = 0.187 in

           (
n := n max tmax , rnickel         )   n = 1.399    (      (                            )
                                                  h x tips n , tmax , rnickel , tmax , rnickel , θ avg = 0.152 in )

           (
n := n max tmax , rflat   )           n = 1.928    (      (                    )                  )
                                                  h x tips n , tmax , rflat , tmax , rflat , θ avg = −0.149 in
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_23_ball_hit_fraction_vs_cut_angle.pdf
title: TP A.23 - Ball-hit fraction vs. cut angle
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                technical proof
                                          TP A.23
                              Ball-hit fraction vs. cut angle
                                          from:
                      “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                    http://billiards.colostate.edu
                        by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                      originally posted: 7/9/06           last revision: 12/1/08

                                                                 OB
                                                                               x
                    aiming             R           2R                                  ball
                      line                                                   d      overlap
                                                                              x
                                     CB

From the figure above, the following equations relate the dimensions x and d to the cut angle :

                                                   xd=R
                                                  d = 2R sin( ϕ)

The amount of overlap between the balls, projected in the aiming line direction is R+x, so
the ball-hit fraction (f) is:

                                     overlap       Rx          2R  d
                              f =              =           =             = 1  sin( ϕ)
                                    diameter         2R          2R

So the relationships between cut angle and ball-hit fraction are:

                                           f ( ϕ)  1  sin( ϕ)
                                           ϕ( f )  asin( 1  f )

Value ranges for the plots:

                          fr  0 0.01  1.0            ϕr  0  deg 1  deg  90 deg
                                                          cut angle vs. ball-hit fraction

                          90

                          75

                          60

                 ϕ( fr)
                          45
                 deg

                          30

                          15

                            0
                                0               0.2               0.4               0.6          0.8              1
                                                                           fr

                                                            ball-hit fraction vs. cut angle
                                1

                            0.8

                            0.6

                  f ( ϕr)

                            0.4

                            0.2

                                0
                                    0           15           30                45         60           75         90
                                                                               ϕr
                                                                              deg

  Here are some common values:

                                        1/8           1/4                1/2              3/4               7/8

 1/8-ball hit:                            1/4-ball hit:                 1/2-ball hit:            3/4 -ball hit:         7/8 -ball hit:

ϕ
      1
                                    ϕ
                                          1
                                                                   ϕ
                                                                         1
                                                                                                ϕ
                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                       ϕ
                                                                                                                             7
     61.045 deg                           48.59 deg                     30 deg                 14.478 deg           7.181 deg
 8                                    4                             2                      4                    8
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_24_the_effects_of_follow_and_draw_on_throw_and_ob_swerve.pdf
title: TP A.24 - The effects of follow and draw on throw
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
technical proof                                                                                technical proof
                                     TP A.24
                    The effects of follow and draw on throw
                                           supporting:
                         “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                       http://billiards.colostate.edu
                         by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                     originally posted: 8/29/2006               last revision: 8/29/2006

                                           final OB
                   initial OB
                                           direction
                   direction
                                                  ∆θ
                         impact
                           line

                                         θthrow
                                                           φ

                                                       n                    t

                                                                                y
                                                           OB

                                                                                           x
                                                                       CB

                                                                           v

   The cue ball (CB) strikes the object ball (OB) with velocity v in the y direction with cut angle φ.
   The OB gets thrown amount θthrow, and spin imparted about the t axis (due to draw or follow)
   causes the trajectory to curve a small amount ∆θ.

                          1.125 ⋅ in
                  R :=                            ball radius converted to meters
                              m
                          2 ⋅ mph
                  v :=                            typical cue ball speed converted to meters/sec
                              m
                              s
                                  v
                  ω roll :=
                                  R               natural-roll spin rate
From TP A.14, the OB post-impact velocity can be expressed with the following relations:

                                         −3                   − 1.088⋅ v
               µ ( v ) := 9.951 × 10            + 0.108 ⋅ e

                    (                )
               v rel v , ω x , ω z , φ :=    (v⋅ sin(φ) − R⋅ ω z)2 + (R⋅ ω x⋅ cos(φ))2
                                                    µ ( vrel( v , ω x , ω z , φ) ) ⋅ v ⋅ cos( φ) 
                                                   
                                                             v rel( v , ω x , ω z , φ)
                 v OBt( v , ω x , ω z , φ) := min                                                 ⋅ v⋅ sin( φ) − R⋅ ω
                                                                           1
                                                                                                  (                    z)
                                                     
                                                                           7                    

                        (                   )
                 v OBn v , ω x , ω z , φ := v ⋅ cos( φ)

The throw angle can then be expressed as:
                                                       v OBt( v , ω x , ω z , φ) 
                        (                )
               θ throw v , ω x , ω z , φ := atan
                                                       vOBn ( v , ω x , ω z , φ) 

 From Equation 10 in TP A.14, the friction impulse component in the tangential direction is:
                                                    ~
                                                    Ft = mvOBt

 From Equation 5, the total frictional impulse is then:
                                                            ~
                                                      ~    Ft
                                                      Fµ =
                                                           eµ t
 and the friction impulse component in the vertical direction, using Equation 3, is:

                   ~ ~            ~ eµ   ~ vB           Rω x cos(φ )
                   Fz = Fµ eµ z = Ft z = Ft z = mvOBt
                                    eµ t   vBt        v sin (φ ) − Rω z

 This frictional impulse imparts spin to the OB about the t axis, which can be found from
 the following angular impulse-momentum equation:

                                                     − 5vOBt ω x cos(φ )
                  ωOB = −
                        t
                                1 ~
                                I
                                   ( )
                                  Fz R = −
                                             5 ~
                                           2 Rm
                                                Fz =
                                                     2(v sin (φ ) − Rω z )

                                                                    (                )
                                                      −5 ⋅ v OBt v , ω x , ω z , φ ⋅ ω x ⋅ cos( φ)
                            (
                    ω OBt v , ω x , ω z , φ :=  )               2 ⋅ ( v ⋅ sin( φ) − R⋅ ω z)

 This induced spin curves the trajectory of the OB slightly with a masse type action.
From TP A.4, applying Equations 21 and 22 to the OB motion, the final (post curve)
OB motion will have the following velocity components:

                              (
                      v OBtf v , ω x , ω z , φ :=    )               5
                                                                     7
                                                                                      (
                                                                         ⋅ v OBt v , ω x , ω z , φ       )

                               (                     )                    (                       (          )        (                   ))
                                                                     1
                      v OBnf v , ω x , ω z , φ :=                        ⋅ 5 ⋅ v OBn v , ω x , ω z , φ − 2 ⋅ R⋅ ω OBt v , ω x , ω z , φ
                                                                     7

Therefore, the change in OB angle due to curve caused by follow or draw is:

                                    v OBtf ( v , ω x , ω z , φ) 
       (              )
    ∆θ v , ω x , ω z , φ := atan
                                    vOBnf ( v , ω x , ω z , φ) 
                                                                   − θ throw( v , ω x , ω z , φ)

 Example values for a 1/2-ball hit:                  φ := 30⋅ deg

             stun shot:                  ω x := 0                                     ω z := 0

                                                         (
                                         θ throw v , ω x , ω z , φ = 4.366 deg            )
                                             (
                                         ∆θ v , ω x , ω z , φ = 0             )
                          A stun shot has the most throw, and there is no OB curving.

               draw shot:                  ω x := ω roll                                  ω z := 0

                                                             (
                                           θ throw v , ω x , ω z , φ = 1.454 deg              )
                                                 (
                                           ∆θ v , ω x , ω z , φ = −0.061 deg      )
                          A draw shot has less throw than a stun shot, and the curve
                          effect tends to decrease the throw, but only by an
                          extremely small amount.

                 follow shot:                ω x := −ω roll                                   ω z := 0

                                                                 (
                                             θ throw v , ω x , ω z , φ = 1.454 deg                )
                                                     (
                                             ∆θ v , ω x , ω z , φ = 0.067 deg         )
                           A follow shot has the same throw as a draw shot, and the
                           curve effect tends to increase the throw, but only by an
                           extremely small amount.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_25_the_relationship_between_spin_rate_factor_and_percent_english.pdf
title: TP A.25 - The relationship between spin-rate-factor and percent-English
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                              technical proof
                                TP A.25
      The relationship between spin-rate-factor and percent-English
                                                  supporting:
                                “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                            http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                 by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                originally posted: 9/1/06        last revision: 9/1/06

             Refer to the drawings in TP A.12 and A.22 for an illustration of the variables.

From TP A.12, defining the "natural roll" rate as ωr = v/R, the spin rate factor (SRF) is defined by:

                                            ω        5 x                      2.25⋅ in                      5 x
                                    SRF =        =                    R :=                    SRF( x ) :=     ⋅
                                            ωr       2 R                           2                        2 R

From TP A.22, the maximum recommended tip offset for maximum English is x = R/2, and the
percentage English (PE) is defined by:

                             PE = 2 
                                         x
                                                              PE( x ) := 2 
                                                                                x
                                              ⋅ 100 %                                ⋅ 100 %
                                        R                                 R

Therefore, SRF and PE are related by:
                                4                                               5        PE
                         PE =       ⋅ SRF⋅ 100 %                     SRF =          ⋅
                                5                                               4 100%

At the maximum recommended tip offset:

                         R
                  x :=                      PE( x ) = 100 %              SRF( x ) = 1.25
                         2
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_26_the_amount_of_sidespin_required_for_gearing_outside_english.pdf
title: TP A.26 - The Amount Of Sidespin Required For Gearing Outside English
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
technical proof                                                                      technical proof
                                TP A.26
      The amount of English required for "gearing" outside English
                                      supporting:
                    “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                              http://billiards.colostate.edu
                      by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                    originally posted: 11/8/06       last revision: 10/4/17

                          object
                           ball            sliding velocity (vC)

                                                                   rotational
                                                                   speed ()

                       point of                                    line-of-centers
                     contact (C)                                        point
                                              L
                            velocity (v)                     line of centers
                                             cut angle ()

                                       cue
                                       ball

 For "gearing" outside English, the sliding velocity of the point of contact between the cue ball and
 object ball must be 0, so:

                                   v C = v  sin ( ϕ)  ω R = 0                                       ( 1)

 where R is the radius of the cue ball. So, using the definition of spin-rate factor (SRF) from TP
 A.12,
                                              ω
                                   SRF =           = sin ( ϕ)
                                            v                                                        ( 2)
                                             
                                             R
From TP A.25, the percent English required to achieve this SRF is:

                                  4                       4
                         PE =          SRF 100 % =           sin( ϕ)  100 %             ( 3)
                                  5                       5

The following plot summarizes how much English is required for "gearing" outside English for
various cut angles:

                             ϕ  0  deg 1  deg  90 deg

                                            4
                             PEg( ϕ)           sin( ϕ)  100 %
                                            5

            80

            60

  PEg( ϕ)
            40
     %

            20

             0
                 0      15             30               45              60        75   90
                                                        ϕ
                                                       deg

 For a half-ball hit:

         ϕ  30 deg                     PEg( ϕ)  40 %

 So, with a half-ball hit, anything less than 40% English will be less than "gearing" and
 will throw the OB to the right, and anything more than 40% English will result in
 excess outside English, causing throw to the left.
 Here are the percentage-english amounts required for other standard ball-hit fractions:
                from TP 1.23:              ϕ( f )  asin( 1  f )               f ( ϕ)  1  sin( ϕ)

     f  0         f  0 %               ϕ( f )  90 deg                      PEg( ϕ( f ) )  80 %

            1
     f            f  25 %              ϕ( f )  48.59  deg                  PEg( ϕ( f ) )  60 %
            4

            1
     f            f  50 %              ϕ( f )  30 deg                      PEg( ϕ( f ) )  40 %
            2

            3
     f            f  75 %              ϕ( f )  14.478 deg                  PEg( ϕ( f ) )  20 %
            4

     f  1         f  100  %            ϕ( f )  0  deg                      PEg( ϕ( f ) )  0  %

 From the data and equations above, it is clear that the percentage english required for
 gearing outside english (no throw) is 80% of 1 minus the ball-hit fraction:

                                           PEg = 0.8 ( 1  f )

 It is easy to visualize the amount of tip offset needed to create gearing outside English for any
 cut angle using the technique described and illustrated below.

 From Equation 3 in TP A.12, and Equation 2 above, the tip offset (x) required for gearing
 outside English is:

                                                                   R 
                          2                2                  2             L     2
                     x=        R SPF =       R sin( ϕ) =               = L
                          5                5                  5        R 5
 where L is the distance between the line of aim and the line-of-centers point (see the diagram
 at the top of this document and the diagram below). Therefore, the required tip offset is
 40% (2/5) of the distance from the aiming line to the line-of-centers point on the front
 of the CB. The following diagram illustrates how this technique is applied at the table:

   the tip offset (x) is                             gearing
 40% of distance (L) to                              outside
the line-of-centers point                            english                              the OB moves along
                                                                                            the line-of-centers
                     x                                                                   direction with no throw
                                L

       parallel to line                      line of                                   billiards.colostate.edu
         of centers                         centers
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_27_spin_transfer.pdf
title: TP A.27 - Spin Transfer
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
technical proof                                                                     technical proof
                                       TP A.27
                                     Spin Transfer
                                       supporting:
                     “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                               http://billiards.colostate.edu
                      by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                    originally posted: 1/5/2007   last revision: 1/30/2007

                  For illustrations and background information, see TP 4.4.

This analysis is for a straight-on (0 deg cut angle) stop shot with English. The cue ball (CB) throws
and transfers spin to the (OB).

From Equation 8 in TP A.5, the normal impulse (transferred linear momentum) between the CB and
OB during impact is:
                                              ~ (1 + e )                                         ( 1)
                                              Fn =       mv
                                                   2
where e is the coefficient of restitution and m and v are the mass and initial speed of the CB.

Friction between the CB and OB during impact creates forces in the tangential direction also.
From TP 4.3, the tangential impulse is related to the normal impulse according to:

                                  ~ ~
                                  Ft = Fn tan θ =
                                                  (1 + e ) mv tan θ                              ( 2)
                                                     2
where θ is the throw angle.

The tangential impulse, in addition to creating throw, transfers spin from the CB to the OB. From
angular impulse and momentum principles,
                                           ~
                                           Ft R = I∆ω                                            ( 3)

where ∆ω is the amount of spin transfer and I is the moment of inertia of the ball (2/5 mR 2 ). From
conservation of angular momentum, the amount of spin transferred to the OB is the same as the
amount of spin lost by the CB.
Therefore, from Equations 2 and 3, the amount of spin transferred to the OB is:
                              ~
                              Ft R (1 + e ) mvR tan θ 5(1 + e )  v 
                         ∆ω =     =                  =            tan θ                       ( 4)
                               I      2      2           4 R
                                               mR 2
                                             5

 From TP A.14, for the limiting case of throw where there is no slipping between the CB and OB at
 the end of the collision (which is where the maximum spin transfer occurs),

                                                       Rω   1 ω
                                         tan (θ ) =       =                                     ( 5)
                                                      7vOB 7  vOB 
                                                                  
                                                              R 
 where ω is the initial spin rate of the CB, and v OB is the final speed of the OB.

 From TP A.15 (Equation 9), the final OB speed is:

                                               vOB =
                                                          (1+ e ) v                             ( 6)
                                                            2

 where v is the initial speed of the CB. Therefore, from Equation 5, the initial CB spin rate can be
 related to the throw with:

                                         ω=7
                                                (1 + e )  v  tan (θ )
                                                                                              ( 7)
                                                      2    R

 Using Equations 4 and 7, we can now solve for the maximum possible spin transfer percentage
 (STP):

                                          ∆ω       54 5
                               STPmax =        =      =   = 35.71%                              ( 8)
                                           ω       7 2 14

 Notice how this result does not depend on the coefficient of restitution (e) of the balls! This is the
 limiting spin transfer percentage, regardless of the ball elasticity.
More generally (but assuming e=1), from TP A.14,

          (            )
        µ µ factor , v := µ factor⋅ 9.951 ⋅ 10  (             −3
                                                                   + 0.108 ⋅ e
                                                                                 − 1.088⋅ v )                 ball friction

where µ factor is used to account for various ball conditions ( µ factor=1 is for average ball friction)

                                                                                                              relative speed
              (                )         (   v ⋅ sin( φ) − R⋅ ω z    ) (   + R⋅ ω x ⋅ cos( φ)   )
                                                                      2                             2
        v rel v , ω x , ω z , φ :=                                                                            between ball
                                                                                                              surfaces

                                               µ ( µ factor , vrel( v , ω x , ω z , φ) ) ⋅ v ⋅ cos( φ) 
                                              
                                                              v rel( v , ω x , ω z , φ)
                                           min                                                          ⋅ v⋅ sin( φ) − R⋅ ω
                                                                         1
                                                                                                        (                    z)
                                              
                                                                                                        tangent of the
              (
        tanθ µ factor   , v , ω , ω , φ :=
                                   x    z           )                     7
                                                                                                v ⋅ cos( φ)                   throw angle

 Therefore, from Equation 4, the spin transfer percentage for any straight-on shot with English is:
                                                                            ∆ω
                                                                   STP =
                                                                             ω

                           (                                   )                           (                            )
                                                                       1 5 v
                     STP µ factor , v , ω x , ω z , φ :=                ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ tanθ µ factor , v , ω x , ω z , φ
                                                                      ωz 2 R

   From TP A.12 and TP A.25, English rate of spin ( ωz) is related to percent English (PE) and
   shot speed according to:
                                                           v
                                ω z( PE , v ) := 1.25⋅ PE⋅
                                                           R

   For a straight-on stun shot, the amount of spin-induced throw and spin transfer depends on the
   shot speed (see the plots on the next page):

                                                                                        1.125 ⋅ in
                       φ := 0                           ω x := 0                 R :=
                                                                                           m

                                       1 ⋅ mph                                3 ⋅ mph                   7 ⋅ mph
                     v slow :=                              v medium :=                     v fast :=
                                         m                                       m                            m
                                            s                                     s                           s

                                                            PE := 0 ⋅ % , 1% .. 100%
                    throw angle vs. percent English at different speeds:

                                      (                  )           ( (
                                     θ PE , v , µ factor := atan tanθ µ factor , v , ω x , −ω z( PE , v ) , φ   ))
                                 6

                                 5
   (
 θ PE , vslow , 1       )
        deg                      4

   (
 θ PE , vmedium , 1         )
                                 3
           deg

   (
 θ PE , vfast , 1   )            2
        deg

                                 1

                                 0
                                     0              20               40           60             80                  100
                                                                           PE
                                                                           %

           spin transfer percentage vs. percent English at different speeds:

                                               (                 )         (
                                            ST PE , v , µ factor := STP µ factor , v , ω x , ω z( PE , v ) , φ   )
                                40

   (                    )
                                30
ST PE , vslow , 1

        %

   (
ST PE , vmedium , 1         )
                                20
           %

   (
ST PE , vfast , 1)
       %
                                10

                                 0
                                     0              20               40           60             80                  100
                                                                           PE
                                                                           %
When looking at spin transfer, spin transfer percentage can be a misleading measure. A more
useful measure is the amount of spin (∆ω) as compared to the ball speed (v/R). This measure is
what is important in determining the amount of rebound angle change off a rail cushion. From
Equation 4, the spin transfer effectiveness (STE) can be defined as:

                                                                  ∆ω
                                                      STE =
                                                                 v
                                                                 
                                                                 R

                                   (              )                (                                          )
                                                         5
                              STE PE , v , µ factor :=       ⋅ tanθ µ factor , v , ω x , −ω z( PE , v ) , φ
                                                         2

                                   25

                                   20
     (
 STE PE , vslow , 1       )
          %
                                   15
     (
 STE PE , vmedium , 1          )
             %

     (
 STE PE , vfast , 1   )            10

         %

                                       5

                                       0
                                           0      20                40              60              80            100
                                                                             PE
                                                                             %

 Therefore, for a slow to medium speed shot, the spin transfer is most effective in the
 40-50% English range, where the spin transfer can be as high as 35.71%.
Now, let's look at what happens for different ball conditions. The plots below show how the
results change for balls with a lot less friction (25%) and a lot more friction (200%), as compared
to average friction (100%), for a medium speed shot.

              throw angle vs. percent English under different ball conditions:

                                    6

      (
    θ PE , vmedium , 25%   )
             deg                    4

      (
    θ PE , vmedium , 100%      )
             deg

      (
    θ PE , vmedium , 200%      )    2
             deg

                                    0
                                        0   20        40          60          80          100
                                                            PE
                                                             %

           spin transfer percentage vs. percent English under different ball conditions:

                                   40

     (                     )
                                   30
   ST PE , vmedium , 25%

            %

     (
   ST PE , vmedium , 100%      )
                                   20
             %

     (
   ST PE , vmedium , 200%      )
             %
                                   10

                                    0
                                        0   20        40          60          80          100
                                                            PE
                                                            %
        spin transfer effectiveness vs. percent English under different ball conditions:

                                 25

                                 20
   (
STE PE , vmedium , 25%   )
          %
                                 15
   (
STE PE , vmedium , 100%      )
           %

   (
STE PE , vmedium , 200%      ) 10
           %

                                 5

                                 0
                                      0   20   40         60        80        100
                                                     PE
                                                     %

Therefore, for low friction (new, clean, and/or polished) balls, the spin transfer
effectiveness is very low. On the other hand, clingy balls can transfer spin much more
effectively.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_28_throw_plots_for_all_types_of_shots.pdf
title: TP A.28 - Throw plots for all types of shots
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                                   technical proof
                                         TP A.28
                             Throw plots for all types of shots
                                            supporting:
                          “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                         http://billiards.colostate.edu
                           by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                    originally posted: 4/3/2007                    last revision: 4/13/2021

                    Note: These results are based on the analysis in TP A.14.

                                         1.125 in
                                  R                                ball radius converted to meters
                                              m

Model of friction based on Marlow data (Table 10 on p. 245 in "The Physics of Pocket Billiards," 1995)
                                    vd  .1 sin ( 45 deg )                    μd  0.11
                                         1                                          1

                                    vd  1 sin ( 45 deg )                     μd  0.06
                                         2                                          2

                                    vd  10 sin ( 45 deg )                    μd  0.01
                                         3                                          3

We can solve for the coefficients from the set of data above using:
                    initial guesses:
                                                                                        1           μd 2  a 
                                  a  μd               b  μd  μd             c              ln         
                                             3                      1       3           vd
                                                                                             2       b 
                                  a  0.01                  b  0.1              c  0.98
                   Given
                                                  c vd1
                           μd = a  b  e
                              1
                                                  c vd2
                           μd = a  b  e
                              2
                                                  c vd3
                           μd = a  b  e
                              3
                   a                                                   a   9.951  10 3 
                    b   Find( a b c)                            b   
                                                                         0.108 
                   c                                                   c   1.088 
                                                                    c v
                                             μ( v )  a  b  e

                    this is the "model" of friction that will be used
MathCAD formulations of Equations 15 through 17, using the above formulation for friction:

                   
v rel v ωx ωz ϕ    v sin(ϕ)  R ωz2  R ωx cos( ϕ) 2

                                  μ v rel v ωx ωz ϕ   v cos( ϕ) 1                           
                                   min                                           v  sin( ϕ)  R ωz 
                                           v rel v ωx ωz ϕ            7                           
θthrow v ωx ωz ϕ  atan
                                                                                  
                                                                                                            
                                                               v  cos( ϕ)                                 

cut angle range:
                               ϕ  0  deg 1  deg  75 deg

various speeds (slow, medium, fast):
                               m                              m                           m
                 v 1  0.5                  v 2  1.5                   v 3  4.5
                               s                              s                           s
                v 1  1.118  mph             v 2  3.355  mph             v 3  10.066 mph
                         v1                            v2                              v3
                  v 1                         v 2                           v 3 
                         m                             m                               m
                           s                              s                               s
spin rate from percent English (from TP A.25):
                                                                   5 v
                                    ω( v PE) = SRF ωroll =         PE
                                                                   4 R
                                                              5 v
                                            ω( v PE)         PE
                                                              4 R

throw angle equation variable info

                                                      
                                              θthrow v ωx ωz ϕ    

        x, r: vertical plane spin rate (follow or draw)                       z, e : English spin rate

          PEr: % topspin (roll)                                     PEe : % English (side spin)

          topspin: r, PEr > 0                                      outside English (OE): e , PEe > 0

          bottom-spin: r, PEr < 0                                      inside English (IE): e , PEe < 0
    These plots show how the amount of throw varies with the amount of English for various cut
    angles, speeds, and amounts of vertical plane spin (draw or follow):

                 PEr  0%       ϕ  0  deg                         PEe  100  % 99%  100  %

                                           5

                               
θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                   deg

                               
θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                           0
                   deg

                               
θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                   deg

                                          5

                                           100                0                                  100
                                                              PEe

                                                              %
                 PEr  0%       ϕ  30 deg

                                           5

                               
θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                   deg

                               
θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                           0
                   deg

                               
θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                   deg

                                          5

                                           100                0                                  100
                                                              PEe

                                                              %
                 PEr  0%       ϕ  60 deg

                                           5

                               
θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                   deg

                               
θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                           0
                   deg

                               
θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                   deg

                                          5

                                           100    0    100
                                                  PEe

                                                  %
                 PEr  50%      ϕ  0  deg

                                           5

                               
θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                   deg

                               
θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                           0
                   deg

                               
θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                   deg

                                          5

                                           100    0    100
                                                  PEe

                                                  %
                 PEr  50%      ϕ  30 deg

                                           5

                               
θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                   deg

                               
θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                           0
                   deg

                               
θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                   deg

                                          5

                                           100    0    100
                                                  PEe

                                                  %

                 PEr  50%      ϕ  60 deg

                                           5

                               
θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                   deg

                               
θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                           0
                   deg

                               
θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                   deg

                                          5

                                           100    0    100
                                                  PEe

                                                  %
                 PEr  100%     ϕ  0  deg

                                           5

                               
θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                   deg

                               
θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                           0
                   deg

                               
θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                   deg

                                          5

                                           100    0    100
                                                  PEe

                                                  %

                 PEr  100%     ϕ  30 deg

                                           5

                               
θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                   deg

                               
θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                           0
                   deg

                               
θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                   deg

                                          5

                                           100    0    100
                                                  PEe

                                                  %
                 PEr  100%     ϕ  60 deg

                                           5

                               
θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                   deg

                               
θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                           0
                   deg

                               
θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                   deg

                                          5

                                           100    0    100
                                                  PEe

                                                  %
The remaining plots show how throw varies with cut angle for various speed shots with various amounts of
English and vertical plane spin (follow or draw):

PEr  0%          PEe  0%                              ϕ  0  deg 1  deg  75 deg

                                             5

                                 
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                             0
                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                            5

                                                 0   15        30                45           60   75
                                                                         ϕ
                                                                        deg

PEr  0%          PEe  25%

                                             5

                                 
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                             0
                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                            5

                                                 0   15        30                45           60   75
                                                                         ϕ
                                                                        deg
 PEr  0%               PEe  50%

                                                  5

                                     
   θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                           deg

                                     
   θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                                  0
                           deg

                                     
   θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                           deg

                                              5

                                                      0    15    30           45    60    75
                                                                        ϕ
                                                                       deg

PEr  0%            PEe  75%

                                              5

                                    
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                         deg

                                    
  θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                              0
                         deg

                                    
  θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                         deg

                                             5

                                                  0       15    30           45    60    75
                                                                      ϕ
                                                                      deg
PEr  0%          PEe  100%

                                             5

                                 
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                             0
                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                            5

                                                 0   15   30         45   60   75
                                                               ϕ
                                                               deg

PEr  0%          PEe  25%

                                             5

                                 
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                             0
                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                            5

                                                 0   15   30         45   60   75
                                                               ϕ
                                                               deg
 PEr  0%               PEe  50%

                                                  5

                                     
   θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                           deg

                                     
   θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                                  0
                           deg

                                     
   θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                           deg

                                              5

                                                      0    15    30           45    60    75
                                                                        ϕ
                                                                       deg

PEr  0%            PEe  75%

                                              5

                                    
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                         deg

                                    
  θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                              0
                         deg

                                    
  θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                         deg

                                             5

                                                  0       15    30           45    60    75
                                                                      ϕ
                                                                      deg
PEr  0%          PEe  100 %

                                             5

                                 
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                             0
                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                            5

                                                 0   15   30         45   60   75
                                                               ϕ
                                                               deg

PEr  10%         PEe  0%

                                             5

                                 
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                             0
                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                            5

                                                 0   15   30         45   60   75
                                                               ϕ
                                                               deg
PEr  25%         PEe  0%

                                             5

                                 
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                             0
                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                            5

                                                 0   15   30         45   60   75
                                                               ϕ
                                                               deg

PEr  50%         PEe  0%

                                             5

                                 
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                             0
                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                            5

                                                 0   15   30         45   60   75
                                                               ϕ
                                                               deg
PEr  50%           PEe  25%

                                              5

                                    
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                         deg

                                    
  θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                              0
                         deg

                                    
  θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                         deg

                                             5

                                                  0       15    30           45    60    75
                                                                      ϕ
                                                                      deg

 PEr  50%              PEe  50%

                                                  5

                                     
   θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                           deg

                                     
   θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                                  0
                           deg

                                     
   θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                           deg

                                              5

                                                      0    15    30           45    60    75
                                                                        ϕ
                                                                       deg
PEr  50%           PEe  75%

                                              5

                                    
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                         deg

                                    
  θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                              0
                         deg

                                    
  θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                         deg

                                             5

                                                  0       15    30           45    60    75
                                                                      ϕ
                                                                      deg

 PEr  50%              PEe  100%

                                                  5

                                     
   θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                           deg

                                     
   θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                                  0
                           deg

                                     
   θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                           deg

                                              5

                                                      0    15    30           45    60    75
                                                                        ϕ
                                                                       deg
PEr  50%           PEe  25%

                                              5

                                    
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                         deg

                                    
  θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                              0
                         deg

                                    
  θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                         deg

                                             5

                                                  0       15    30           45    60    75
                                                                      ϕ
                                                                      deg

 PEr  50%              PEe  50%

                                                  5

                                     
   θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                           deg

                                     
   θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                                  0
                           deg

                                     
   θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                           deg

                                              5

                                                      0    15    30           45    60    75
                                                                        ϕ
                                                                       deg
PEr  50%           PEe  75%

                                                5

                               
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ 
                          deg

                               
  θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ 
                                                0
                          deg

                               
  θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ 
                          deg

                                               5

                                                    0       15    30           45    60    75
                                                                        ϕ
                                                                        deg

 PEr  50%              PEe  100 %

                                                    5

                                
   θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ 
                           deg

                                
   θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ 
                                                    0
                           deg

                                
   θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ 
                           deg

                                                5

                                                        0    15    30           45    60    75
                                                                          ϕ
                                                                         deg
PEr  100%        PEe  0%

                                             5

                                 
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                             0
                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                            5

                                                 0   15   30         45   60   75
                                                               ϕ
                                                               deg

PEr  100%        PEe  25%

                                             5

                                 
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                             0
                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                            5

                                                 0   15   30         45   60   75
                                                               ϕ
                                                               deg
 PEr  100%             PEe  50%

                                                  5

                                     
   θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                           deg

                                     
   θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                                  0
                           deg

                                     
   θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                           deg

                                              5

                                                      0    15    30           45    60    75
                                                                        ϕ
                                                                       deg

PEr  100%          PEe  75%

                                              5

                                    
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                         deg

                                    
  θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                              0
                         deg

                                    
  θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                         deg

                                             5

                                                  0       15    30           45    60    75
                                                                      ϕ
                                                                      deg
PEr  100%        PEe  100%

                                             5

                                 
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                             0
                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                            5

                                                 0   15   30         45   60   75
                                                               ϕ
                                                               deg

PEr  100%        PEe  25%

                                             5

                                 
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                             0
                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                            5

                                                 0   15   30         45   60   75
                                                               ϕ
                                                               deg
 PEr  100%             PEe  50%

                                                  5

                                     
   θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                           deg

                                     
   θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                                  0
                           deg

                                     
   θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                           deg

                                              5

                                                      0    15    30           45    60    75
                                                                        ϕ
                                                                       deg

PEr  100%          PEe  75%

                                              5

                                    
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                         deg

                                    
  θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                              0
                         deg

                                    
  θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                         deg

                                             5

                                                  0       15    30           45    60    75
                                                                      ϕ
                                                                      deg
PEr  100%        PEe  100 %

                                             5

                                 
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v2 ω v2 PEr ω v2 PEe ϕ
                                             0
                     deg

                                 
  θthrow v3 ω v3 PEr ω v3 PEe ϕ

                     deg

                                            5

                                                 0   15   30         45   60   75
                                                               ϕ
                                                               deg
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_29_using_throw_to_limit_cue_ball_motion.pdf
title: technical proof TP A.29 technical proof Using throw to limit cue ball motion
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                           TP A.29                                                     technical proof

                            Using throw to limit cue ball motion
                                              supporting:
                            “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                        http://billiards.colostate.edu
                              by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                          originally posted: 5/18/2007         last revision: 6/11/2015

   The illustration below defines the pertinent terminology and shows how throw (throw) is
   related to shot angle (shot) and cut angle (). The cue ball has initial velocity vCB and final
   velocity vCB', and the object ball has final velocity vOB'. The cue ball is assumed to have pure
   sidespin () at contact (i.e., stun shot). A goal is to limit the cue ball motion to the right (x
   direction) while achieving the desired shot angle to the left.
                                                                                            shot
                           shot
                                                                                                      -
                                    
                                                                                          vOB'
                  vOB'                                                                                     throw
                                                                                          -
                         throw

       2R
                                                                             vCB'
                                        n               vCB'                                     n
                                                t
                                                                                                  t
  d                  d

           r                                
                                                                                          -
      

                                                              y                                                        
                                                                     x

                                  vCB                                                       vCB

                    (a) throw and cut in                                            (b) throw and cut in
                        same directions                                                 opposite directions
From TP A.5, the cue ball's final speed component in the normal (n) direction is:

                                                (1  e) cos 
                                     vCBn '                    vCB                                 ( 1)
                                                       2
where e is the coefficient of restitution.

Also, the change in speed in the normal direction for both balls is related to the normal impulse
with:
                                  Fˆn
                                       vOBn ' 
                                                 1  e  cos  v
                                                                    CB                              ( 2)
                                   m                    2

For given ball conditions, the cut angle and amount of English create a certain amount of throw
throw (see TP A.14). The throw angle relates the tangential and normal speeds and impulses,
and can be expressed (from TP A.5) as:
                                                            vOBt ' Fˆt
                                         tan  throw                                            ( 3)
                                                            vOBn ' Fˆn

Therefore, using Equation 2, the change tangential speed of both balls can be expressed as:

                  Fˆt            Fˆ
                       vOBt '  n tan  throw  
                                                     1  e cos  tan  v
                                                                           throw CB                 ( 4)
                  m              m                          2

Therefore, the cue ball's final speed component in the tangential direction (see TP A.5) is:

                                         Fˆt                                            
               vCBt '  vCB sin          sin    1  e  cos  tan  throw  vCB
                                                         1                                          ( 5)
                                         m              2                               
When the cut angle () is positive (i.e., in the same direction as the throw, as shown in figure
"a" above), both the cut angle and throw terms add to the tangential velocity. When the cut
angle is negative (i.e., in the opposite direction from the throw, as shown in figure "b" above),
the cut-angle term subtracts from the throw portion of the tangential velocity.

For a cue-ball "hold" or "kill" shot, the goal is to have the cue ball move as little as possible to
the right (in the x direction). A good measure for how much the cue ball moves to the right after
contact is the x-component of the velocity after contact. I will refer to this as the cue-ball "drift
speed." It can be found from the n-t components, which are at angle  relative to the x-y axes:

                              vCBx '  vCBn ' sin    vCBt ' cos                             ( 6)

Likewise, the object ball velocity's x-component can be found with:

                              vOBx '  vOBn ' sin    vOBt ' cos                             ( 7)
For the remainder of the analysis, I will assume a perfectly elastic collision (i.e., e=1, which
isn't far from the typical value of about 0.94). With this, the final cue ball drift speed can be
expressed from Equations 1, 5, and 6 as:

                       vCBx '  vCB cos sin    cos  tan  throw                       ( 8)

To compare the cue-ball hold-effectiveness of one shot vs. another, assuming the desired shot
angle (shot) is the same, it is useful to express the cue ball's final x-direction speed as a
percentage of the final object ball speed. The final object ball speed can be expressed as:

                                      vOB '     vOBn '2  vOBt '2                              ( 9)

where the object ball's final n-t velocity components are given by Equations 2 and 4. Again, for
e=1, this can be expressed as:

                                   vOB '  vCB cos  1  tan 2  throw                          ( 10)

Therefore, the hold effectiveness can now be measured with the following drift speed, expressed
as a percentage of the final object ball speed:

                                      vCBx ' cos tan    tan  throw 
                          CBdrift          
                                      vOB '         1  tan 2  throw                             ( 11)

Similarly, using Equations 2, 4, 7, and 11, the object-ball drift percentage can be expressed as:

                                      vOBx '  sin    cos  tan  throw 
                          OBdrift                                                                 ( 12)
                                      vOB '          1  tan 2  throw 

For a desired total shot angle shot, and for a given amount of throw throw, the required cut
angle is (see figure "a" above):
                                                                                               ( 13)

where  is:

                                             shot   throw                                      ( 14)

Angle  can be found from the triangle shown to the left of figure "a" above. The following two
equations relate the vertical and horizontal distances in the triangle:

                                      2 R cos( )  r cos(  )  d                                  ( 15)

                                           2 R sin    r sin                                  ( 16)
            Solving Equations 15 and 16 for , using Equation 14 gives:

                                                                                          
                                                               sin                   
                                                     tan 1        shot      throw
                                                                                                                                 ( 17)
                                                               d  cos(   ) 
                                                                                    throw 
                                                               2R                         
                                                                           shot

            So, from Equations 13, 14, and 17, the cut angle is related to the shot and throw angles with:

                                                                                                          
                                                                               sin                   
                            shot   throw     shot   throw  tan 1        shot      throw
                                                                                                                                 ( 18)
                                                                               d  cos(   ) 
                                                                                                    throw 
                                                                               2R                         
                                                                                           shot

            To see if throw can be used to help kill cue ball motion for a shot with a required angle shot,
            we can compare the cue ball's drift speed with throw to the drift speed without throw (e.g., if
            gearing outside English is used, or if CIT is neglected). With no throw (throw=0), using
            Equations 11, 14, and 18, the drift-speed percentage can be expressed as:
                                              CBdrift no _ throw  cos shot  tan  shot                                    ( 19)

            With throw, the drift-speed percentage can be expressed as:

                                                   cos shot   throw tan  shot   throw     tan  throw 
                          CBdrift with _ throw                                                                                   ( 20)
                                                                              1  tan 2  throw 

       The drift-speed percentage, with throw, can actually be negative, implying that the cue ball actually
       drift in the same direction as the shot (to the left). From the bracketed term in the numerator, this
       occurs when  is less than the negative of the shot angle shot (see more below).

             Here is the MathCAD implementation of Equations 17, 19, and 20:

                                                                         D
                         D  2.25 in                            R                            ball diameter and radius
                                                                         2

                                                                        
                                                                     sin θshot  θthrow   
                                                  
                         β d θshot θthrow  atan                                   
                                                               d  cos θshot  θthrow 
                                                               2 R                     

                                                                                        
                                 cos θshot  θthrow  tan θshot  θthrow  β d θshot θthrow                 tanθthrow
                         
CBDWT d θshot θthrow 
                                                                                              
                                                                                                     2
                                                                             1  tan θthrow

                                                                  
                         CBDNT d θshot  cos θshot  tan θshot  β d θshot 0                     
A typical value for the maximum amount of throw possible, with a slow-speed stun-shot with the
optimal amount of English, is about 6 degrees. Using this, we can see how the drift-speed
percentages vary with the shot angle. For this example, we will use a shot distance of 3 ball
diameters.

                d  3  D           θthrow  6  deg           θshot  0  deg 0.1 deg  10 deg

                                  30

                                  20

        
CBDWT d θshot θthrow     
            %

                 
                                  10
CBDNT d θshot

       %

                                   0                                                                      0

                                  10
                                        0         2              4             6              8           10
                                                                     θshot

                                                                      deg

 Regardless of the shot angle, the cue ball drift will be less if throw is used, as compared to not
 using throw (see the two curves above). For small shot angles, if the throw angle is large enough,
 the cue ball can be stopped completely and even be made to drift in the same direction as the
 shot (i.e., the drift is negative). For the example above, the maximum shot angle possible is:

                      θshot  2  deg
                      Given

                                    
                             CBDWT d θshot θthrow = 0    
                       θshot  Find θshot

                       θshot  1.997 deg

 From Equation 11, the limit where negative cue ball drift is possible is always where the cut
 angle  is the negative of the throw angle throw, or from Equation 18, where  is the negative of
 the shot angle shot:
                                                        
                                   β d θshot θthrow  1.997 deg
We can also look at how the drift speed percentages vary with distance between the cue ball and
object ball, for a given shot angle and throw amount:

                                 θshot  1  deg                                  d  2  D 2.1 D  10 D

                                 5

        
CBDWT d θshot θthrow        0                                                                                0

            %

       
CBDNT d θshot 
       %
                                5

                                10
                                      2                 4             6                 8              10         12
                                                                               d
                                                                            D

 So when the cue ball is closer to the object ball, it is much easier to use throw to reduce (and
 even reverse) the cue ball drift. However, even for the small shot angle (1 deg) and large throw
 angle (6 deg) above, it is impossible to reverse or prevent cue ball drift once the balls are past a
 certain distance apart. For the example above, the distance is about 6 ball diameters (see the
 graph above or the calculation below).

                                          d  6  D        θshot  1  deg

                                          Given

                                                            
                                                  CBDWT d θshot θthrow = 0     
                                          d  Find( d )

                                          d
                                               5.989           d  13.476 in
                                          D
        An interesting challenge shot is to try to create an OB shot angle (θshot>0) while stopping the
        CB in place (CBDWT=0). Below is a plot of the maximum shot angle possible for different
        distances (d) between the CB and OB, assuming a typical maximum throw value of 6 degrees.

            θthrow  6  deg

                                                                                  
            max_shot_angle_with_CB_stop( d )  root CBDWT d θshot θthrow θshot    

                                                        d  1.01 D 1.2 D  10 D

                                  6

                                  4

max_shot_angle_with_CB_stop( d)
             deg

                                  2

                                  0
                                       2                4                 6              8        10
                                                                     d
                                                                     D

             The maximum shot angle possible approaches the maximum amount of throw possible as
             the CB gets closer to the OB (d = D). As the distance (d) between the CB and OB
             increases, the maximum shot angle possible becomes less.

             Theoretically (neglecting swerve), per the plot above, it is possible to hold the CB and
             create an OB angle at any CB-OB distance. However, at the table, there is a practical limit
             to the CB-OB distance over which this can be done. The analysis above has ignored the
             effects of swerve. Swerve changes the effective cut angle of the shot, making it more
             difficult to hold the CB. And at larger distances, shot swerve becomes more of a factor.
             Also, stun (for maximum throw) is more difficult to control at larger distances. Also, it is
             much more difficult to judge squirt and swerve and be accurate with the hit at larger
             distances.

        Please refer to the "throw-CB hold" resource page in the FAQ section at
        billiards.colostate.edu for illustrations, examples, and video demonstrations.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_2_carom_shot_vs_cut_shot_example.pdf
title: TP A.2 - Carom shot vs. cut shot example
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
4/7/04
technical proof                                                                                               technical proof
                                                    TP A.2
                                        Carom shot vs. cut shot example
                                                     supporting:
                                   “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                                http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                     by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                           T: table size (6.5', 7', 8', 9')        T  8 ft
                                                    D  2.25 in       ball diameter

                                      x  2.5 D     from TP A.1 and the figure below

          T/4

                                                                T/2
                                                                                                       cue ball offset
             r                                                                                      from the head spot

          cut
         shot
                                                                    d
                      45°                                                                       x

                  r
                                                                         T/4
                      carom
                       shot

        The approximate distance to the target for each shot is:

                                    T
                                    4
                       r                                          r  2.828 ft
                              cos ( 45 deg )
From the figure below, the distance from the cue ball to the impact point is:

                                                 2
                            T  D cos( β)  ( x  D sin( β) ) 2
           d ( β)                       
                           2              

                                                        T/2
                                                                                                   

                                                                d
                                                                                           x

                     D

For the cut shot,

          β  45 deg                        d cut  d ( β)                  d cut  3.914 ft

                          x  D sin( β) 
           αcut  atan                                      αcut  8.838 deg
                          T
                          D cos( β) 
                        2               

For the carom shot with a half-ball hit (see the figures above and below and TP A.1),

                                      D
             T           x            2
                 =              
             2       tan( α)        sin( α)

                                                                    d
                                                                                               x

                       D
          D/2
         Solving for  numerically,

                     α  10 deg
                     Given
                                                           D
                                T         x                2
                                    =             
                                2       tan( α)        sin( α)

                     αcarom  Find( α)                              αcarom  8.018 deg

            β  30 deg  αcarom                     d carom  d ( β)           d carom  3.864 ft

Error analysis for the cut shot:

            the cut angle is:
                      ϕ  45 deg  αcut                        ϕ  53.838 deg

            From TP 3.6, the effective pocket size for a slow, 0 degree entry angle shot is:
                      p  3.052  in

            The allowable angle error from the object ball to the pocket is therefore
              (see figure below):
                                        p
                                        2
                      Δθcut  2  atan                          Δθcut  5.149 deg
                                        r 

                                p

                                                       r
                                                                      

             From TP 3.4, the allowable angle error in the aiming line direction is:

                        Δϕcut  0.155  deg
Error analysis for the carom shot:

   Assuming the object ball will be pocketed with just the slightest hit by the deflected cue ball,
    on either side (and neglecting possible interaction with the rail), the allowable angle error in
    the deflected cue ball path is (see figure below):

                          Δθcarom  2  asin 
                                               D
                                                             Δθcarom  7.602 deg
                                               r   

                                                        r
                                                                    

                                    D

                                          D

   From TP 3.3:
       The cut angle , as a function of ball-hit fraction f, is given by:

              ϕ( f )  asin( 1  f )

       and the cue ball deflection angle , as a function of cut angle , is given by:

                                sin( ϕ)  cos( ϕ) 
              θ( ϕ)  atan                   
                                sin( ϕ)   
                                          2 2
                                          5 

  The maximum cue ball deflection angle occurs for a half-ball hit where f = 0.5:

        θmax  θ( ϕ( .5) )         θmax  33.67 deg

  Therefore, the least cue ball deflection allowed is:

        θmin  θmax  Δθcarom                  θmin  26.069 deg
The ball-hit fraction limits that result in min are:
     fmin  .22477                fmax  .77325

as shown by:

       
     θ ϕ fmin      26.069 deg       
                                     θ ϕ fmax      26.069 deg

 Therefore, the effective target size for the cue ball at the foot spot object ball is (see figure below

             
      Δs  fmax  fmin  D         Δs  0.031 m

 and the resulting allowable angle error in the cue ball aiming line is:

                          Δs 
                          2 
      Δϕcarom  2  atan                      Δϕcarom  1.525 deg
                          dcarom 

                                             d

                          s
                                                              

 Finally, the ratio of the carom shot margin of error to the cut shot margin of error is:

                           Δϕcarom
                                       9.838
                            Δϕcut

 Therefore, the carom shot is almost 10-times easier to
 execute!!!
w):
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_30_the_effects_of_cue_tip_offset_cue_weight_and_cue_speed_on_cue_ball_speed_and_spin.pdf
title: TP A.30 - The effect of cue tip offset, cue weight, and cue speed
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                            technical proof
                                           TP A.30
                  The effect of cue tip offset, cue weight, and cue speed
                                 on cue ball speed and spin
                                              supporting:
                            “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                         http://billiards.colostate.edu
                             by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                         originally posted: 5/24/2007         last revision: 12/7/2019

                        before impact                                   after impact
                                                                                       
                   vs                                           vs'

                  ms            mb                  x                                             vb

                                     R

 Linear momentum must be conserved during the impact, so:

                                              ms vs  ms vs ' mb vb                                         ( 1)

 If an elastic collision is assumed, energy is also conserved:

                              1        1          1       12       
                                ms vs  ms vs '2  mb vb   mb R 2  2
                                     2                  2
                                                                                                             ( 2)
                              2        2          2       25       

 The linear impulse between the tip and ball at impact is equal to the change in
 momentum of both the stick and ball:

                                          Fˆ  ms vs  vs '  mb vb                                        ( 3)

 and the angular impulse is equal to the change in angular momentum of the ball:

                                                    2       
                                              xFˆ   mb R 2                                               ( 4)
                                                    5       
From Equation 1, the final stick speed can be expressed as:
                                                  mb
                                    vs '  vs       vb                                        ( 5)
                                                  ms
and from Equations 3 and 4, the spin rate of the ball can be expressed as:
                                            5 vb
                                               x                                             ( 6)
                                            2 R2

Substituting Equations 5 and 6 into Equation 2, and solving for the final ball speed gives:
                                                  2v s
                                vb 
                                        mb 5  x  2                                         ( 7)
                                       1         
                                          m s  2  R  

Obviously, to achieve maximum ball speed (vb ) for a given stick speed (vs), the offset (x) should
be 0 (i.e., center-ball hit). For a typical mass ratio (1/3, per below), the maximum ball speed is
related to the stick speed (neglecting energy losses) according to:

                                  vb       2       3
                                                   1 .5
                                  vs  1  2                                                   ( 8)
                                       1  3 

So for a center-ball hit, with typical equipment (and neglecting energy losses), the ball moves
50% faster than the stick. With an extremely heavy stick (ms >> mb ), the theoretical limit for
the maximum speed of the ball is twice the speed of the stick.

Substituting Equation 7 into Equation 6 gives the ball spin rate:

                                              5vs x               N
                                                                                            ( 9)
                                       m 5 x          2
                                                                  D
                                    R 1  b    
                                       2

                                       ms 2  R  

For maximum ball spin, for a given cue-stick speed, the derivative of  with respect to x
must be zero, so:

       d                        mb 5  x  2             5                                ( 10)
           0  DN ' ND '  R 1 
                              2
                                        5vs  5vs xR 2  2 x   0
       dx                        ms 2  R             R 

Solving this equation for x gives the tip offset that results in the maximum ball spin-rate:

                                       x   2  mb 
                                             1                                             ( 11)
                                       R   5  ms 
Typical mass values are 6 oz for the ball and 18 oz for the cue stick. This gives a mass ratio of
1/3, so the predicted offset for maximum spin is:

                                         x    8
                                                0.73                                          ( 12)
                                         R   15

When considering the offset for maximum spin, we need to ensure the ball separates from the cue
stick after impact; otherwise, the tip would continue to push and rub on the cue ball after the initial
impact (if we neglect the effects of squirt and cue stick deflection and vibration for the moment).
The condition for separation between the tip and ball is:

                                               vb  vs '                                        ( 13)

Equations 5 and 7 can be used to show that this constraint is equivalent to:

                                         x   2  mb 
                                               1                                            ( 14)
                                         R   5  ms 

Comparing this to Equation 11 shows that the offset that produces the maximum spin rate is also
on the verge of preventing cue tip and ball separation. So it would appear that 0.73R is still the
optimal value for achieving maximum ball spin.

The analysis above has assumed the collision is perfectly elastic (i.e., no energy is lost). Now,
we'll look at the effects of an inelastic collision between the cue tip and cue ball. In this case,
the coefficient of restitution (e) is less than one, and energy is lost in the collision. If 
represents the efficiency of the collision, Equation 2 can be written as:

                         1            1              1       12       
                        ms vs 2       m s v s ' 2  mb vb   mb R 2  2
                                                           2
                                                                                                ( 15)
                         2            2              2       25       
This equation can be written (by multiplying by 2/ms) as:

                                                             2                                  ( 16)
                                v s 2  v s ' 2  m r v b 2  m r R 2  2
                                                             5
where mr is the ball-to-cue-stick mass ratio:
                                                        mb
                                                 mr                                            ( 17)
                                                        ms

Substituting Equations 5 and 6 into Equation 16 and simplifying results in:

                                 5 x   2
                                         2
                                                              1          2
                       1  m r       vb   2v s vb   1   v s   0                ( 18)
                                2  R                    mr          
Equation 18 is a quadratic, and can be solved for the final ball speed:

                                                 1    5  x   
                                                                   2
                                    1               1    
                                                 mr  2  R   
                                                                                                ( 19)
                           vb  v s                                 
                                                      5 x  
                                                               2
                                                                     
                                            1  mr             
                                                    2  R     

 For an elastic collision (e = 1), no energy is lost (=1=100%), and Equation 19 reduces to
 Equation 7.

 To see how the collision efficiency () is related to the coefficient of restitution (e), let's look at
 the simple case of a center-ball hit (x=0, =0). The coefficient of restitution (COR = e) is defined
 as the ratio of the speed of separation and the speed of approach between the cue stick and cue
 ball:

                                         speed of separation vb  vs '
                                    e                                                         ( 20)
                                          speed of approach     vs

 From Equations 1 and 20, it can be shown that final cue stick speed is

                                           vs ' 
                                                    1  mr e  v                               ( 21)
                                                     1  mr  s
 and the final cue ball speed is:

                                            vb 
                                                      1  e  v                                ( 22)
                                                     1  mr  s

 Substituting Equations 21 and 22 into Equation 16 (with =0), gives:

                                    
                                       1  mr e   mr 1  e 
                                                  2              2
                                                                                                ( 23)
                                               1  mr 2
Here's a plot of how the efficiency η varies with e and mr, for typical ranges of values:

                                                     1  mr e2  mr ( 1  e) 2
                                             
                                       η e mr 
                                                             1  mr
                                                                        2

                                               6                         6                                6
    e  0.68 0.69  0.76       mr_small               mr_medium                       mr_large 
                                               21                        19                               17
                                   0.91

                                      0.9

               
              η e mr_small   0.89
              η e mr_medium
                                0.88
              η e mr_large
                                   0.87

                                   0.86

                                   0.85
                                      0.7                  0.72                    0.74
                                                                        e

 The efficiency and COR vary with cue tip type and the mass of the cue stick. The COR (e) also
 might vary with tip offset and shot speed, but I don't have data to quantify this. From HSV B.42,
 typical leather-tip playing-cue CORs are in the 0.73 range. For a 19 oz cue, that corresponds to
 an efficiency of:
                                        η 0.73    0.888
                                                   6
                                                  19 

 For the remainder of the analysis, I'll use an efficiency of 0.87 (87%), corresponding to an energy
 loss of 13%, which is fairly typical and is what Coriolis used in his book.
                                                        η  0.87

 We will now look at how ball speed (from Equation 19) and spin (from Equation 6, expressed in
 units of revolutions per second), vary with tip offset and cue mass for a constant collision
 efficiency:

                        2.25 in
                 R                  ball radius                       v s  5  mph     typical stick speed
                           2

                                            1η      5 x 
                                                                    2
                                 1    η        1     
                                             mr      2  R                                      1   5                     x
                   
      v b v s x mr  v s                                                           
                                                                            rps v s x mr                           
                                                                                                        v b v s x mr 
                                                                                                  2 π 2
                                                         2                                                                   2
                                       1  mr    x  
                                                5                                                                            R
                                               2 R 
                                                                       x  0  R 0.01 R  0.6 R

                              15
                                                                                                           0.5

                         
                              10
  rps vs x mr_small

  rps  vs x mr_medium

  rps  vs x mr_large

                               5

                               0
                                   0                             0.2                         0.4                     0.6
                                                                              x
                                                                              R

Therefore, with a typical collision efficiency, the offset that produces the most spin is
close to the miscue limit (0.5). Note that, for the assumptions above, a lighter cue (with
a larger mass ratio mr), will deliver slightly more spin to the cue ball than a heavier cue for
offsets close to the miscue limit (x/R = 0.5), but this probably isn't enough of a reason to
try to switch to a lighter cue stick. The only other way to increase the amount of spin,
other than by increasing the tip offset (up to the miscue limit), is to increase the stick
speed.
It is interesting to compare the relative effects of increasing stick speed vs. increasing tip
offset. Let's look at increasing stick speed by 10% vs. increasing the offset by 10% (for
50% and 100% maximum offset, and at medium speed):
                                6
                          mr                    typical ball-to-stick mass ratio
                                19
                                          
                                       rps 1.1v s x mr                          
                                                                                  rps v s 1.1x mr  
          x  0.25 R                                             1.1                                     1.069
                                              
                                        rps v s x mr                                
                                                                                   rps v s x mr
                                          
                                       rps 1.1v s x mr                          
                                                                                  rps v s 1.1x mr  
          x  0.5 R                                              1.1                                     0.984
                                              
                                        rps v s x mr                                
                                                                                   rps v s x mr
So increasing the stick speed has the same effect on the spin rate, regardless of the
amount of offset. The spin rate increases by the same amount as the speed. However,
increasing the tip offset has a smaller effect, and this effect decreases at larger offsets.
Therefore, it is safer to keep the cue tip away from the miscue offset limit a little, and just
add more stick speed to get more spin. This is more efficient than trying to add more
offset close to the limit, provided you can create more stick speed without sacrificing
accuracy too much.
Now let's look at how the cue stick and cue ball speeds after impact vary with tip offset for
different ball-to-cue mass ratios.

From Equation 5, the cue stick speed after impact (vs') is related to the cue ball speed (vb )
according to:

                                                                      
                                     v s' v s x mr  v s  mr v b v s x mr 
First, let's look at a medium-weight cue (18 oz):
                                                                6  oz
                                                          mr 
                                                                18 oz

                                                    x  0  R 0.01 R  0.6 R

                             7
                                                                                         0.5

                             6

           
        vs' vs x mr   5
               mph

           
        vb vs x mr   
                             4
               mph

                             3

                             2
                                 0                  0.2                       0.4              0.6
                                                                  x
                                                                  R

Therefore, close to the miscue limit (x/R = 0.5) the cue ball is at risk of not separating from the
cue tip cleanly. Although, in reality, the cue tip deflects away from the cue ball after the hit,
likely giving the cue ball time and distance to clear.
 Now let's look at a heavier cue (22 oz):

                                                    6  oz
                                              mr 
                                                    22 oz

                                7
                                                                          0.5

                                6

              
           vs' vs x mr   5
                  mph

              
           vb vs x mr   
                                4
                  mph

                                3

                                2
                                    0       0.2                 0.4
                                                       x
                                                       R

Therefore, with a heavier cue, the cue ball will definitely not separate cleanly from the cue tip
for offsets greater than about x/R=0.45, and double hits, pushes, and/or miscues would be
likely.
 Now let's look at how cue ball speed varies with stick weight and collision efficiency.

 Remember, from Equation 23, collision efficiency depends on both the coefficient of
 restitution (COR or e) and the ball-to-stick mass ratio (mr):

                                                          1  mr e2  mr ( 1  e) 2
                                                  
                                         η e mr 
                                                                     1  mr
                                                                                2

 From Equation 19, for a center-ball hit (x=0), the cue ball speed depends on the stick speed
 (vs), the ball-to-stick mass ratio (mr), and the COR (e) according to:

                                                                                         
                                                                              1  η e mr        
                                                         1      
                                                               η e mr            mr
                                              
                              v b v s mr e  v s
                                                                      1  mr

 The following plot shows how cue ball speed (as a percentage of stick speed) varies over a
 wide range of possible cue weights. A typical value is used for the COR (0.73), based on
 HSV B.42 with a typical playing cue with a medium-hardness leather tip. This corresponds
 to an efficiency of about 89% for a typical-weight cue (19 oz):
                                                                    6  oz
                                     e  0.73                mr 
                                                                    19 oz
                                                                                                     
                                                                                             η e mr  88.79  %

                                                         v s  15 mph       ms  14 oz 14.1 oz  25 oz

                           140

                           135

   
 vbvs 
            6 oz     
                    e
            ms
                      130
       vs  %

                           125

                           120
                                            15                                      20                              25
                                                                              ms

                                                                              oz

Notice that for a given cue speed, more cue weight gives more cue ball speed, as one would
expect. Although, the benefit of the added weight diminishes at higher weights. Also, in
reality, it is more difficult to stroke a heavier cue at the same speed as a lighter cue.
With a higher-efficiency collision, the results change a little. From HSV B.42, typical
phenolic-tip break cues have a COR (e) as high as 0.87. For a 19oz cue, that corresponds to
a collision efficiency of about 94%:
                                                             6
                              e  0.87                mr 
                                                             19
                                                                                     
                                                                             η e mr  94.166 %

                                                         v s  15 mph               ms  14 oz 14.1 oz  25 oz

                        155

                        150

  
vbvs 
           6 oz    
                   e 145
           ms
                   
      vs  %            140

                        135

                        130
                                          15                                     20                              25
                                                                            ms

                                                                            oz

With a perfectly elastic collision (100% efficient), the theoretical limit for the
ball-speed-to-stick-speed percentage, for a ridiculously-heavy cue is 200%, as predicted
by Equation 7. This is not realistic to achieve, but one thing is clear: a higher-efficiency
tip results in significantly more cue ball energy. Here are typical values comparing a
leather-tip playing cue to a phenolic-tip break cue:

                                                                                                        6  oz
            eleather  0.73         ephenolic  0.87                     v s  15mph           mr 
                                                                                                        19 oz

Breaking power is related to the energy delivered to the cue ball, which is related to the
square of the speed, so here is how the tips compare in terms of breaking power:

                                               
                                           v b v s mr ephenolic   2
                                                                            1.168
                                                                 
                                                                      2
                                            v b v s mr eleather

So a high-efficiency phenolic tip provides about a 17% increase in breaking power over
a typical medium-hardness leather tip, which is significant.
For a given cue weight, cue ball speed increases linearly with cue speed, as shown by the
following plot (and as predicted by Equation 7):
                                                                                                     6  oz
   ms  19 oz                 v s  15 mph 15.1 mph  25mph                            mr           e  0.87
                                                                                                      ms

                      40

                      35

                  30
     vb vs mr e

           mph

                      25

                      20
                                      15                                   20                                  25
                                                                      vs

                                                                     mph

 If you could increase in your cue speed by 10%, for a given weight cue, the cue ball speed
 would also increase by 10%, and the effective increase in breaking power would be 21%:

                                                 1.1 vb2
                                                               = 1.21
                                                         2
                                                    vb

 If you were able to generate the same cue speed with a range of cue weights, you can also
 increase breaking performance by using a heavier cue. Increasing cue weight from 17 to 22
 oz (with a fixed cue speed) would increase the cue ball speed by 6.3%, which would
 correspond to an effective increase in breaking power of 13%:

                                                       6  oz                          6  oz
             v s  15 mph                mr_light                      mr_heavy 
                                                       17oz                            22oz

                 
             v b v s mr_heavy e                            
                                                             v b v s mr_heavy e    2
                                          1.063                                                 1.13
              v b  v s mr_light e
                                                                                      
                                                                                           2
                                                              v b v s mr_light e

 So with a dramatic increase in cue weight (17 oz to 22 oz), the benefit is not as large as one
 might expect, even if the heavier cue could be stroked at the same speed as the lighter cue
 (which is usually not the case).

 So what break cue weight should you use to get the most power with the best tip?
 Obviously, and as shown above, a heavier cue will deliver more speed to the cue ball;
 however, it is more difficult to generate stick speed with a heavier cue. The optimal cue
 weight, allowing for the best combination of weight and speed will vary with each individual
 based on muscle physiology. For more info, see the cue weight FAQ page here:

 https://billiards.colostate.edu/faq/cue/weight/
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_31_the_physics_of_squirt.pdf
title: TP A.31 - The physics of squirt
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                 technical proof
                                             TP A.31
                                        The physics of squirt
                                               supporting:
                             “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                       http://billiards.colostate.edu
                              by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                             originally posted: 8/2/07         last revision: 1/29/08

 For a more detailed, and slightly different, coverage of squirt physics, see Ron
 Shepard's 2001 paper:
 "Everything you always wanted to know about cue ball squirt, but were afraid to ask ."
 For more illustrations and basic explanations, see my August '07 instructional article.

                                                                    
                                                      S
                         me
                                            F
                                                           C                  b

                                                                        mb                              
                                                                R
                                                                                                              v
                                       C
             y
                                                      R
                                        b
                                                  

                         x
                                                R 2  b2

       ~                                                                : squirt angle
       F : forward impulse acting on the ball
       ~
       S : side (squirt) impulse acting on the ball                     C: point of contact

        v: ball speed after impact                                      mb : ball mass

        : ball angular speed after impact                              me : shaft end effective mass
                                                                             ("endmass")
        R: ball radius

                         b: tip offset (Note - this is different from Shepard's "b")
Applying linear impulse and momentum principles to the ball in the x and y directions gives:

                                                t
                                         ~                                                         ( 1)
                                         F   F (t )dt  mb vc
                                                 0
                                                t
                                         ~
                                         S   S (t )dt  mb vs                                   ( 2)
                                                0
where

                                c  cos          s  sin                                   ( 3)

Note that forces F and S are components resulting from both normal and friction forces acting
during the brief contact time t. Because the tip grips the ball during contact, the friction force
is difficult to model directly.

Applying linear impulse and momentum principles to the shaft in the y direction gives:
                                             ~
                                             S  me vC y                                           ( 4)

where me is the effective mass of the end of the shaft (i.e., the "endmass"), and v Cy is the speed
of the point of contact in the y direction. Equations 2 and 4 suggest conservation of momentum
in the vertical direction. The squirt momentum gained by the ball is balanced by cue stick
deflection in the opposite direction. The effective mass is a function of geometry and material
properties of the end of the shaft. It relates to how far the transverse elastic wave travels down
the shaft (from the tip) during the brief contact time between the tip and ball. Experiments ha ve
suggested that only the last 6 inches or so of the shaft (closest to the tip) contribute to end
mass. This is why cue manufactures have been successful with reducing squirt by using a
smaller tip and shaft diameter, using a smaller and lighter ferrule, and drilling out the end of the
shaft, all to reduce the effective endmass.

It is important to note that Equation 4 assumes the tip grips the ball. The tip is assumed to
remain in contact with the ball as the ball rotates (see HSV A.76a for visual evidence of how well a
chalked leather tip "grabs" the ball). While the tip and ball are in contact, the velocity of the tip
and ball are equal at the point of contact. The velocity of contact point C, at the end of the impact
period, can be written as:
                          
                                                                   
                    vC  v    R  v c iˆ  s ˆj    kˆ  R  c iˆ  s ˆj              ( 5)

where, from the triangle in the figure above,

                                                          2
                                             b                               b
                          c  cos( )  1                 s  sin( )                        ( 6)
                                             R                               R

so, from Equations 5 and 6, the vertical (y or j) component of the point-of-contact velocity is:

                                        vC y  Rc  vs                                          ( 7)
Applying angular impulse and momentum principles to the ball gives:

                                         ~       ~
                                        bF  Rc S  I                                      ( 8)

where I is the mass moment of inertia of the ball (2/5 m b R2 ).

Substituting Equation 7 into Equation 4 and equating this to Equation 2 gives:

                                     mb vs  me Rc  vs                                ( 9)

Solving this equation for the cue ball angular speed gives:

                                             vs mb  me 
                                                                                           ( 10)
                                                me Rc

Substituting Equations 1, 2, and 10 into Equation 8 gives:

                                                      2         vs m  me  
                          bmb vc  Rc mb vs         mb R 2   b          
                                                                                             ( 11)
                                                      5         me Rc       

This equation can be rewritten as:

                                                      b
                                                       c
                                  s
                                      tan        R
                                                                                             ( 12)
                                  c                   2 m 
                                                  c  1  b 
                                                    2

                                                       5  me 

Therefore, using Equation 6, the squirt angle can be related to the tip offset and shaft endmass
as:

                                             5b                 2     
                                                         b          
                                                      1  
                                         1     2R       R          
                                    tan                          2 
                                                                    
                                            1  mb  5 1   b                        ( 13)
                                             me 2   R   
                                                                   
Below is a plot of squirt angle (in degrees) vs. offset factor (b r = b/R) for the full range of
possible tip offsets (b = 0 to 0.5R) and for a typical range of ball-mass-to-endmass ratios (m r
= mb /me ), covering everything from a break cue (large endmass and small mass ratio) to a
playing cue with a low-squirt shaft (small endmass and large mass ratio).

                                                       5 b  1  b 2 
                                                       2 r               r     
                                  α b r mr  atan                         
                                                       1  mr  5   1  br2 
                                                                2           

                                                      b r  0 0.01  0.5

                          4

            
          α br 15 3 
                deg

            
          α br 20   
                          2
                deg

            
          α br 40   
                deg
                          1

                          0
                              0       0.1            0.2              0.3           0.4   0.5
                                                              br

 The squirt angle is very close to a linear function of tip offset (i.e., the larger the
 offset, the larger the squirt, by a proportional amount).
Below is a plot of squirt angle (in degrees) vs. ball-mass-to-endmass ratios (m r = mb /me ) for
various amount of English (25%, 50%, 100%).

                                                         mr  10 10.5  50

                                5

           
          α 25% .5 mr    4
               deg

           
          α 50% .50 mr 3 
                deg

                           
                                2
          α 100% .5 mr

                deg
                                1

                                0
                                 10                20               30           40        50
                                                                   mr

  Here is a plot of squirt (degrees) vs. endmass (grams) for different amounts of English:
                                                mb                       mb
                   mb  6  oz       me_low                me_high 
                                                50                        10
                                            me  me_low 1.05 me_low  me_high

                                            5

                                   mb 
                α25% .5            
                                   me  4
                                      
                       deg

                                   mb  3
                α50% .5            
                                   me 
                                      
                       deg
                                            2
                                    mb 
                α100% .5            
                                    me 
                                          1
                       deg

                                            0
                                                    5                    10           15
                                                                         me

                                                                         gm
So it appears that squirt varies fairly linearly with effective endmass, so a certain
percentage change in endmass will create close to the same percentage change
in squirt.

Here is some example data for a 25% decrease in endmass:

 high-squirt cue:
                                                                                     mr 
           mr  15                       
                                  α .5 mr  3.466  deg                  α .5 
                                                                                
                                                                                           2.709  deg
                                                                                      .75 
                                                               mr 
                           mr                      α .5            α .5 mr
           α .5 mr  α .5    0.756  deg              .75 
                           .75                                                          21.821 %
                                                                  
                                                                α .5 mr   
 low-squirt cue:
                                                                                     mr 
           mr  40                       
                                  α .5 mr  1.446  deg                  α .5 
                                                                                
                                                                                           1.103  deg
                                                                                      .75 

                                                               mr 
                           mr                      α .5            α .5 mr
           α .5 mr  α .5    0.343  deg              .75 
                           .75                                                          23.714 %
                                                                  
                                                                α .5 mr   
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_3_minimum_cue_elevation_required_for_a_head_spot_to_foot_spot_center_ball_hit_shot.pdf
title: TP A.3 - Minimum Cue Elevation Required For A Head Spot To Foot Spot Center Ball Hit Shot
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, banks_kicks_rails
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
12/3/04

technical proof                                                                                            technical proof
                                             TP A.3
                           Minimum cue stick elevation required for
                          a head-spot-to-foot-spot center-ball-hit shot

                                                 supporting:
                               “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                         http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                            ball diameter:         D := 2.25⋅ in

                                                 table size:       T := 8 ⋅ ft

                                                                   H :=  1 +
                                                                                 11 
                        rail height above playing surface:                              ⋅ in
                                                                                32 
                             cue stick thickness at rail:          C := 0.722 ⋅ in

                                                                                         center
                                                                                         ball hit
                                             θ
          head
           rail

                    minimum required                                                                cue ball on
                                                                                                    head spot
                    cue stick elevation

                                             NOT DRAWN TO SCALE

                         θ

                  C/2                                       L

                                             θ
                    H
                                                                                                              D/2

                                                         d ~ T/4
initial guesses for unknowns:

               T
        d :=               L := d               θ := 3 ⋅ deg
               4

Solving two loop closure equations (in the horizontal and vertical directions)
for the unknown elevation angle:

               Given
                                           C
                       d = L⋅ cos( θ ) +       ⋅ sin( θ )
                                           2

                       D                           C
                           + L⋅ sin( θ ) = H +          ⋅ cos( θ )
                       2                            2

                θ  := Find( θ , L)
               
               L

                        θ = 1.384 deg               L = 23.998 in
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_4_post_impact_cue_ball_trajectory_for_any_cut_angle_speed_and_spin.pdf
title: TP A.4 - Post-impact cue ball trajectory for any cut angle, speed, and spin
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
technical proof                                                                                technical proof

                                                TP A.4
                  Post-impact cue ball trajectory for any cut angle, speed, and spin
                                                  supporting:
                                “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                          http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                 by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                originally posted: 1/4/05     last revision: 7/3/08

                                                       initial                        final
                                                     cue ball        θc            cue ball
                                                     direction                     direction

                                                             cue ball
                                                            trajectory              tangent
                                                                                      line

                     object                      y
                      ball

                                                                 x
                                                                              90
                                                                            degrees

                                        aiming
                                          line
                                                                          impact
                                                                            line

                                      initial
                                    cue ball                cut angle (φ)
                                    velocity
                                  (pre impact)
The translational equation of motion for the cue ball (after impact) is:
                                                r    r     r
                                                F = ma = mv&                                                       (1)
         r
where F is the friction force between the table cloth and the cue ball during the curved trajectory
     r
and v is the velocity of the center of the cue ball.

The rotational equation of motion for the cue ball (after impact) is:
                                            r    r 2      r
                                            M = Iα = mR 2ω&
          r                                         5                                                              (2)
where M is the moment of the friction force about the center of the cue ball
     r
and ω is the angular velocity of the cue ball.

The velocity of the contact point (C) between the cue ball and the table cloth is:
         r    r r r
         vC = v + ω × R = (v x iˆ + v y ˆj ) + (ω x iˆ + ω y ˆj ) × (− Rkˆ) = (v x − Rω y )iˆ + (v y + Rω x ) ˆj   (3)

Note that z-axis spin (ωz, resulting from side English) would have no effect on the contact point
velocity, and therefore would not affect the remainder of this analysis.

The friction force (µmg) opposes the slip, in a direction opposite from the relative slip velocity
direction:
                                         r         r
                                                   vC
                                         F = − µmg r = − µmgvˆC                                                    (4)
                                                   vC

The friction moment can be expressed as:

                                       r r r
                                       M = R × F = − µmgR( Rˆ × vˆC )                                              ( 5)

Taking the time derivative of the left side of Equation 3, we can relate the linear and angular
accelerations:

                                                  r     r r r                                                      (6)
                                                 v&C = v& + ω& × R

Substituting Equation 4 into Equation 1 gives the cue ball acceleration:
                                                       r
                                                      v& = − µgvˆC                                                 (7)

Substituting Equation 5 into Equation 2 gives the cue ball angular acceleration:

                                                r       5µg ˆ
                                               ω& = −      ( R × vˆC )                                             (8)
                                                        2R
Therefore the last term in Equation 6 can be written as:

                               r     r        5µg ˆ            r     5µg
                              ω& × R = −         ( R × vˆC ) × R = −     vˆC                                      ( 9)
                                              2R                      2

Substituting Equations 7 and 9 into Equation 6 gives:

                                    r              5µg         7 µg
                                   v&C = − µgvˆC −     vˆC = −      vˆC                                         (10)
                                                    2            2

The following conclusions can be made concerning Equation 10:

              The relative velocity vector, and therefore the friction force vector (see Equation 4),
              does not change direction!!! The relative slip speed slows to 0 and remains 0
              thereafter (i.e., the cue ball starts rolling without slipping at a certain point and
              continues to roll in a straight line). Also, from Equations 4 and 7, the friction force
              vector and the cue ball acceleration are constant (in magnitude and direction).
              Therefore, the cue ball trajectory will be parabolic, just as with any constant
              acceleration motion (e.g., projectile motion).

From Equation 10, it is clear that the relative speed changes according to:

                                                             7 µg
                                                   v&C = −                                                     (11)
                                                               2
Therefore, the relative speed varies according to:

                                                                7 µg
                                              vC (t ) = vCo −        t                                         (12)
                                                                  2
where vCo is the initial relative speed (immediately after object ball impact).

So, now, the relative velocity vector is known over time:

                                        r                7 µg
                                        vC (t ) = (vCo −      t )vˆCo                                          (13)
                                                           2

If the initial cue ball linear and angular velocities (immediately after object ball impact) are specified,
Equation 3 gives:
          r        r       r       r
          vC (0) = v (0) + ω (0) × R = (v xo − Rω yo )iˆ + (v yo + Rω xo ) ˆj = vCox iˆ + vCoy ˆj = vCo vˆCo   (14)

The initial relative velocity magnitude (speed) is given by:

                     vCo = vCox + vCoy = (v xo − Rω yo ) 2 + (v yo + Rω xo ) 2
                                    2          2
                                                                                                               (15)
and the direction of the initial relative velocity (which remains constant) is:

                                (vCox iˆ + vCoy ˆj )       (v xo − Rω yo )          (v yo + Rω xo )
                       vˆCo =                          =                     iˆ +                     ˆj          (16)
                                       vCo                      vCo                      vCo

Using Equation 16 in Equation 7, we now know the cue ball acceleration
                                                                                                                  (17)
                                                    r
                                                   v& = − µgvˆCo
The solution to this equation is:
                                             r        r                                                           (18)
                                             v (t ) = v (0) − µgtvˆCo

This equation applies only while the cue ball is sliding. When sliding ceases, the cue ball moves in
a straight line tangent to the trajectory at that point. The time it takes for sliding to cease can be
found from Equation 12:
                                                               7 µg
                                         vC ( ∆t ) = vCo −          ∆t = 0                                        (19)
                                                                 2
So the cue ball path will be curved only for the following duration (after object ball impact)

                                                              2vCo                                                (20)
                                                       ∆t =
                                                              7 µg

The final deflected angle of the cue ball path can be found by looking at the slope of the trajectory at
the time given by Equation 20. From Equations 16 and 18, using Equation 20, the final components
of the cue ball velocity are:
                                      µg (v xo − Rω yo )
                                                              ∆t = v xo − (v xo − Rω yo ) = (5v xo + 2 Rω yo )
                                                                         2                 1
          v xf = v x (∆t ) = v xo −                                                                               (21)
                                              vCo                        7                 7
 and
                                      µg (v yo + Rω xo )
                                                               ∆t = v yo − (v yo + Rω xo ) = (5v yo − 2 Rω xo )
                                                                          2                 1                     (22)
          v yf = v y (∆t ) = v yo −
                                               vCo                        7                 7

 Therefore, the final deflected cue ball angle is:

                                                 v xf            5v + 2 Rω yo 
                                 θ c = tan −1         = tan −1  xo
                                                                  5v − 2 Rω 
                                                                                                                 (23)
                                                 v yf              yo      xo 

 The final ball velocity vf (Equations 21 and 22) can also be expressed in the following vector form:

                                                   v    5v 2 v v
                                                   v f = vo + ω o × r                                             (24)
                                                        7    7
 where vo is the initial post-impact velocity, and ωo is the initial angular velocity. Interestingly, the
 final velocity does not depend on friction µ. 5/7 (71.4%) of the final velocity comes from
 the initial velocity vector (vo) in the tangent-line direction, and 2/7 (28.6%) comes from the
 initial spin velocity vector (ωo x r). The r vector is straight up from the resting point to the center
 of the ball (i.e., r = -R, relating it to the R vector above).
 Equation 18 can be integrated to find the x and y coordinates of the cue ball trajectory:

                                                               µgvCox 2
                                           x(t ) = v xo t −                 t                                (25)
                                                                   2vCo
                                                               µgvCoy
                                           y (t ) = v yo t −                t2                               (26)
                                                                   2vCo

 Now it is clear that the trajectory is a parabola (see also the paragraph after Equation 10).
 Equations 25 and 26 apply only for the time period given by Equation 20.

 Given the initial cue ball speed (v) in the y direction, and neglecting the friction between the cue ball
 and object ball (for now), the post-impact cue ball speed and speed components are (see the figure
 below and TP 3.1 for more details):

                                                                                                             (27)
                                                 vo = v sin(φ )
                                                                                                             (28)
                                             v xo = v sin(φ ) cos(φ )

                                             v yo = v sin 2 (φ )                                             (29)

                                                                     v cos(φ)

                                                               φ
                                                   v
                                                             vo =
                                                           v sin(φ)
                                                                                 vyo = v sin2(φ)
                                                                    φ

                                                       vxo = v sin(φ)cos(φ)

If we assume the cue ball has no y-axis spin (i.e., ωyo = 0, which means the shot has only
follow, draw, or stun), then Equation 15 (using Equations 28 and 29) becomes:
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                   Rω 
                              + (v yo + Rω ) = v sin(φ ) cos (φ ) +  sin(φ ) +
                          2
             vCo = v xo                     2                           2
                                                                                                           (30)
                                                                                v sin(φ )  
where ω is the initial spin of the cue ball about the x axis. And from Equation 14,

                                     vCox = v xo = v sin(φ ) cos(φ )                                         (31)

                                    vCoy = v yo + Rω = v sin 2 (φ ) + Rω                                     (32)
And from Equation 23,

                                                   
                                                     = tan −1  5v sin(φ ) cos(φ ) 
                                            5v xo                                                         (33)
                        θ c = tan −1                                            
                                      5v yo − 2 Rω            5v sin (φ ) − 2 Rω 
                                                                       2

Using Equations 28 through 32 in Equations 25 and 26, the cue ball trajectory becomes:

                                                                  µgt 2 cos(φ )
                    x(t ) = vt sin(φ ) cos(φ ) −
                                                                                                2
                                                                                 Rω 
                                                     2 cos (φ ) +  sin(φ ) +
                                                             2
                                                                                                           (34)
                                                                              v sin(φ ) 

                                                                          Rω  2
                                                      µg  sin(φ ) +              t
                                                                       v sin(φ ) 
                     y (t ) = vt sin 2 (φ ) −                                                               (35)
                                                                                            2
                                                                              Rω 
                                                2 cos 2 (φ ) +  sin(φ ) +            
                                                                           v sin(φ ) 

 From Equation 20 and 30, we see that Equations 34 and 35 apply only from time 0 to time:

                                                                                        2
                                2v sin(φ )                             Rω 
                           ∆t =            cos 2 (φ ) +  sin(φ ) +                                       (36)
                                  7 µg                              v sin(φ ) 

 If the cue ball is rolling without slipping at object ball impact, then:

                                                                 v                                          (37)
                                                         ω=−
                                                                 R
 and Equation 33 reduces to:
                                                                        
                                                        sin(φ ) cos(φ ) 
                                          θ c = tan −1                                                    (38)
                                                        sin 2 (φ ) + 2 
                                                                        
                                                                     5 

 This agrees with the famous result from the 1987 Wallace and Schroeder paper, which formed the
 basis for the 30 degree rule (see TP 3.3).

 Also, for a rolling cue ball, Equation 24 (using Equations 27 and 37) becomes:

                                v    5v 2 v v 5                   2
                                v f = vo + ωo × r = v sin (φ )tˆ + vˆj                                      (39)
                                     7    7        7              7
 where t is the tangent line direction and j is the original direction of the rolling cue ball (i.e., the
 aiming line). The figure below shows the implications of this very useful result, using similar
 triangles. The final ball direction is at 2/7 of the distance x between the tangent line
 and aiming line, measured perpendicular to the tangent line (i.e., parallel to the
 impact line). This result is true for a rolling cue ball at any cut angle and speed.
                                    j: cue ball
                                       aiming line

                                                  vf: final cue ball
                                          5x
                                          7           direction

                             5v
                                      φ
                             7
                                                     2         t: tangent
                        v                            7x           line

                                                     2v
                                                     7 o

                             2
                             7v           5v
                                          7 o
                                                v sin(φ)
                                                  = vo

In Bob Jewett's July '08 Billiards Digest article, he shows how you can use the cue stick to
help predict the final cue ball direction for a rolling cue ball shot. If you hold the cue stick (of
length "x") perpendicular to the tangent line (i.e., parallel to the impact line), with one end of
the cue stick on the aiming line and the other end on the tangent line, then the final direction
of the cue ball will be at the 2/7 point along the cue (at 2/7 x) from the tangent line.

Now, even though shot speed doesn't affect the final direction of the cue ball, it does affect
the path to the final direction, so this also needs to be taken into consideration when
predicting where the cue ball will travel (see the plots below and my June '05 Billiards Digest
article).
Now we will look at ball trajectories for various types of shots. Equations 34 and 35 describe the
general trajectories for follow, draw, and stun shots. They apply only during the time interval given by
Equation 36. Here are the parameters used in the equations along with MathCAD form of the
results:

     NOTE: All parameters are expressed in metric (SI) equivalent values for dimensionless analysis

          ball properties:

                            2.25⋅ in                         D
                    D :=                            R :=
                               m                             2

                     D = 0.057                      R = 0.029

          coefficient of friction between the cue ball and table cloth:
                     μ := 0.2                                                   approximate value from several references
                                                                                (also backed up by my own experiment)
          gravity
                               g
                     g :=
                             m                        g = 9.807
                              2
                             s 

           time required for cue ball to start rolling (cease sliding):

                                                                                                          2
                                                               ⋅ cos( ϕ) +  sin( ϕ) +               
                                             2 ⋅ v ⋅ sin( ϕ)                2               R⋅ ω
                      ∆t( v , ω , ϕ) :=                                                                              from Equation 36
                                                  7 ⋅ μ⋅ g                               v ⋅ sin( ϕ) 

           velocity components when cue ball starts rolling in a straight line:

                                              5
                      v xf ( v , ω , ϕ) :=        ⋅ v ⋅ sin( ϕ) ⋅ cos( ϕ)                                     from Equations 21 and 28
                                              7

                      v yf ( v , ω , ϕ) :=
                                              1
                                              7
                                                (                  2
                                                  ⋅ 5 ⋅ v ⋅ sin( ϕ) − 2 ⋅ R⋅ ω   )                            from Equations 22 and 29

             the final deflected cue ball angle:

                           θc( v , ω , ϕ) := atan                                   
                                                         5 ⋅ v ⋅ sin( ϕ) ⋅ cos( ϕ)
                                                                                                     from Equations 23, 28, and 29
                                                                      2
                                                      5 ⋅ v⋅ sin( ϕ) − 2 ⋅ R⋅ ω 
x position of the cue ball during the curved trajectory:
                                                                                2
                                                                         μ⋅ g ⋅ t ⋅ cos( ϕ)
      x c( t , v , ω , ϕ) := v ⋅ t⋅ sin( ϕ) ⋅ cos( ϕ) −                                                           from Equation 34
                                                                                                              2
                                                          2 ⋅ cos( ϕ) +  sin( ϕ) +                     
                                                                     2                          R⋅ ω
                                                                                             v ⋅ sin( ϕ) 

x position of the cue ball during and after the curved trajectory:

          x ( t , v , ω , ϕ) :=    ∆T ← ∆t( v , ω , ϕ)
                                   x c( t , v , ω , ϕ) if t ≤ ∆T

                                   x c( ∆T , v , ω , ϕ) + vxf ( v , ω , ϕ) ⋅ ( t − ∆T) otherwise

y position of the cue ball during the curved trajectory:

                                                   μ⋅ g ⋅ t2⋅  sin( ϕ) + R⋅ ω               
                                                                                             
                                               2
          y c( t , v , ω , ϕ) := v ⋅ t⋅ sin( ϕ) − 
                                                                          v ⋅ sin( ϕ) 
                                                                                                                 from Equation 35
                                                                                             2
                                                   2⋅ cos( ϕ) +  sin( ϕ) +
                                                              2                      R⋅ ω 
                                                                                               
                                                                               v ⋅ sin( ϕ)  

y position of the cue ball during and after the curved trajectory:

                  y ( t , v , ω , ϕ) :=   ∆T ← ∆t( v , ω , ϕ)
                                          y c( t , v , ω , ϕ) if t ≤ ∆T

                                          y c( ∆T , v , ω , ϕ) + vyf ( v , ω , ϕ) ⋅ ( t − ∆T) otherwise

  Parameters used in plots below:

                T := 5                                     number of seconds to display

                t := 0 , 0.01 .. T                         0.01 second plotting increment

                ϕ := 30⋅ deg                               cut angle for 1/2-ball hit

                           mph
                v := 5 ⋅                                   average speed in mph converted to m/s
                               m
                               s
                           v
                ω := −                                     roll speed
                           R

                θc( v , ω , ϕ) = 33.67 ⋅ deg               deflected cue ball angle
         Equation for the tangent line:                                                                    Equation for the ball (for scale)

                                                                                                                  x ball ( t) := R⋅ cos ⋅ 
                                                   t                                                                                     t π
                       x tangent_line( t) :=           ⋅2
                                                   T                                                                                    T 2
                       y tangent_line( t) := x tangent_line( t) ⋅ tan( ϕ)
                                                                                                                  y ball ( t) := R⋅ sin ⋅ 
                                                                                                                                         t π
                                                                                                                                        T 2

                                                   various follow shots with natural roll

         various speeds (in mph, converted to m/s) from slow to very fast:

                                  mph                         mph                        mph                        mph
                     v 1 := 2 ⋅                v 2 := 4 ⋅                   v 3 := 6 ⋅                 v 4 := 8 ⋅
                                      m                           m                        m                          m
                                      s                           s                        s                          s

                                              v1                    v2                v3                     v4
                                      ω1 := −               ω2 := −           ω3 := −                ω4 := −
                                              R                     R                 R                      R

                     0.6

 (
y t , v1 , ω 1 , ϕ )
y( t , v2 , ω 2 , ϕ)

y( t , v3 , ω 3 , ϕ)
                     0.4
y( t , v4 , ω 4 , ϕ)

ytangent_line ( t)

yball( t)

                     0.2

                      0
                           0                                0.2                           0.4                               0.6
                                  (             ) (                   ) (                ) (                  )
                               x t , v1 , ω 1 , ϕ , x t , v2 , ω 2 , ϕ , x t , v3 , ω 3 , ϕ , x t , v4 , ω 4 , ϕ , xtangent_line ( t) , xball( t)
                                                       various draw shots with reverse natural roll

                                                    v1                   v2                     v3                        v4
                                              ω1 :=                ω2 :=                  ω3 :=                     ω4 :=
                                                    R                    R                      R                         R

                      0.4

 (
y t , v1 , ω 1 , ϕ )
                     0.2
y( t , v2 , ω 2 , ϕ)

y( t , v3 , ω 3 , ϕ)

y( t , v4 , ω 4 , ϕ)
                        0
ytangent_line ( t)

yball( t)

− yball( t)
                     − 0.2

                     − 0.4

                             0                   0.2                       0.4                      0.6                       0.8
                                  (               ) (                  ) (                 ) (                  )
                                 x t , v1 , ω 1 , ϕ , x t , v2 , ω 2 , ϕ , x t , v3 , ω 3 , ϕ , x t , v4 , ω 4 , ϕ , xtangent_line ( t) , xball( t)
                                     various slower speed follow shots with natural roll

                                     mph                       mph                            mph                        mph
                       v 1 := 0.5⋅                v 2 := 1 ⋅                   v 3 := 1.5⋅                  v 4 := 2 ⋅
                                       m                        m                               m                        m
                                        s                        s                               s                        s

                                            v1                  v2                     v3                          v4
                                    ω1 := −             ω2 := −                ω3 := −                     ω4 := −
                                            R                   R                      R                           R

                     0.4

 (
y t , v1 , ω 1 , ϕ )
y( t , v2 , ω 2 , ϕ)
                     0.3
y( t , v3 , ω 3 , ϕ)

y( t , v4 , ω 4 , ϕ)

ytangent_line ( t)
                     0.2
yball( t)

                     0.1

                      0
                           0                   0.1                       0.2                         0.3                      0.4
                                (               ) (                  ) (                 ) (                  )
                               x t , v1 , ω 1 , ϕ , x t , v2 , ω 2 , ϕ , x t , v3 , ω 3 , ϕ , x t , v4 , ω 4 , ϕ , xtangent_line ( t) , xball( t)
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_5_the_effects_of_ball_inelasticity_and_friction_on_the_90_degree_rule.pdf
title: TP_A-5
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
TP A.5
      The effects of ball inelasticity and friction on the 90° rule
                                            supporting:
                         “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                       http://billiards.colostate.edu
                          by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

               originally posted: 2/6/2005        last revision: 3/19/2014

     This technical proof looks at the effects of ball-to-ball coefficient of
    restitution (e) and friction ( ) on the 90 degree rule derived in TP 3.1.

                   NOTE: each ball is assumed to have equal mass (m)

E   h b ll h         l     d       i     i    l   i   h        l( )     d    i l()
                                   Non-Commercial Use Only
Each ball has equal and opposite impulses in the normal (n) and tangential (t)
directions given by:

                                            and

The change in momentum of each ball in the n direction is equal to the normal impulse:

                                                                                             (1)

The change in momentum of each ball in the t direction is equal to the tangential impulse:

                                                                                             (2)

The speed of separation in the n direction is less than the speed of approach
according to the coefficient of restitution (e):

                                                                                             (3)

The initial speed components, from the figure above, are:

                                                                                             (4)

                                                                                             (5)

where  is the cut angle.

From Equation 1, we can write:
                                                                                             (6)

Using this in Equation 3, with Equation 5, gives:

                                                                                             (7)

Substituting this back into Equation 1 gives:

                                                                                             (8)

Using this in Equation 1, with Equation 5, gives:

                                                                                             (9)

Now we know both post-impact normal speed components (Equations 7 and 9).

                              Non-Commercial Use Only
The impulse in the t direction cannot reverse the direction of the relative tangential
speed and it cannot exceed that allowed by friction, so from TP A.14 (Equation 15):

                                                                                                      (10)

 I want to thank Sorokin Alexander for pointing out an error in Equation 10 in the original version
 of this document. The equation is now more accurate; although, the results below are
 unchanged.

 Using this in Equation 2, we can solve for the post-impact tangential speeds:

                                                                                                      (11)

                                                                                                      (12)

 So now we can determine the direction of each ball after impact, along with the
 angle between their paths (see the "after impact" figure above):

                                                                                                      (13)

                                                                                                      (14)

                                                                                                      (15)

                              Non-Commercial Use Only
       Now putting the equations in MathCAD form and entering typical data:

                        e ≔ 0.94                       coefficient of restitution between balls

                        μ ≔ 0.06                       average coefficient of friction between balls

                        ϕ ≔ 30 ⋅                       half-ball hit

                    ⎛⎛               ⎛⎡ μ ⋅ (1 + e) ⋅ cos (ϕ) ⎤⎞⎞                    ⎞
  (         )       ⎜⎜      ( )
θ1 e , μ , ϕ ≔ angle 2 ⋅ sin ϕ − min ⎜⎢      2                ⎥ ⎟ ⎟ , 1 − e ⋅ cos ϕ ⎟
                                                                     (     )     ( )                   (from Equation 13)
                    ⎜⎜               ⎜⎢      ―⋅ sin (ϕ)       ⎥ ⎟⎟                   ⎟
                    ⎝⎝               ⎝⎣      7                ⎦⎠ ⎠                   ⎠
                      ⎛                        ⎛⎡ μ ⋅ (1 + e) ⋅ cos (ϕ) ⎤⎞⎞
θ2 (e , μ , ϕ) ≔ angle (1 + e) ⋅ cos (ϕ) , min ⎜⎢
                      ⎜                                2
                                                          ⋅ sin (ϕ)
                                                                        ⎥⎟ ⎟                           (from Equation 14)
                      ⎜                        ⎜⎢      ―                ⎥⎦⎟⎠⎟⎠
                      ⎝                        ⎝⎣      7

θ (e , μ , ϕ) ≔ 90 ⋅       − θ1 (e , μ , ϕ) − θ2 (e , μ , ϕ)                                           (from Equation 15)

  With no inelasticity or friction:

            θ1 (1 , 0 , ϕ) = 0                     θ2 (1 , 0 , ϕ) = 0                    θ (1 , 0 , ϕ) = 90

                         This is the 90 degree rule result presented in TP 3.1.

  With inelasticity only:

            θ1 (e , 0 , ϕ) = 2.975                 θ2 (e , 0 , ϕ) = 0                    θ (e , 0 , ϕ) = 87.025

                                   inelasticity "shortens" the cue ball angle

  With friction only:

            θ1 (1 , μ , ϕ) = 0                     θ2 (1 , μ , ϕ) = 3.434                θ (1 , μ , ϕ) = 86.566

                        friction "shortens" the object ball angle (this is called "throw")

    With inelasticity and friction:

              θ1 (e , μ , ϕ) = 3.307                 θ2 (e , μ , ϕ) = 3.434                  θ (e , μ , ϕ) = 83.259

          So the 90 degree rule is actually something less than the 90 degree rule.
          e and vary with shot speed and cut angle in practice; but in all cases,
            the actual angle between the ball paths will be less than 90 degrees.

                                         Non-Commercial Use Only
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_6_the_effects_of_ball_inelasticity_and_friction_on_the_30_degree_rule.pdf
title: TP A.6 - The effects of ball inelasticity and friction on the 30° rule
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                              technical proof

                                                 TP A.6
                     The effects of ball inelasticity and friction on the 30° rule
                                                      supporting:
                                    “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                               http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                     by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                    originally posted: 2/7/05      last revision: 1/30/21

                       See TP A.4 and TP A.5 for background information and illustrations.

   The cue ball is assumed to be rolling initially in the y direction (see the figure in TP A.4):
                                                                        vˆ
                                               v  vˆj                   i                                             (1)
                                                                          R

   From Equation 7 in TP A.5, the normal component of the post-impact cue ball velocity is:

                                                            (1  e) cos 
                                                    vn0                    v                                             (2)
                                                                   2

   To find the tangential component, we need to know the direction of the friction impulse. This direction will be
   opposite from the direction of the relative sliding velocity of the point of contact (B) between the cue ball and
   the object ball, at impact. The total velocity of this point is:

                                                                                                                      (3)
                  v B  v    rB / O  vˆj  ( iˆ)  R ( sin  iˆ  cos  ˆj )  vˆj  v cos kˆ
                                                 v
                                                 R

   Using Equation 4 in TP A.5, and eliminating the normal component of this velocity, we can express the relative
   sliding velocity vector for the point of contact:
                                                  
                                                            
                                                  vrel  v sin  tˆ  cos kˆ                                        (4)

   From Equation 8 in TP A.5, the normal impulse is given by:

                                                      Fˆn 
                                                            1  e  cos  mv                                           (5)
                                                                    2

   Therefore, the friction impulse can be expressed as:

                                                
                                                vrel 1
                                                                                        
                           F fric   balls Fn   balls mv1  e  cos   sin  tˆ  cos kˆ
                           ˆ                 ˆ
                                                vrel 2
                                                                                                                         (6)
Therefore, the tangential component of the friction impulse (reversing the sign to match the direction
in TP A.5) is:
                                         1
                              Fˆ fric t   balls mv1  e sin   cos 
                                         2                                                                   (7)

and the vertical component is:
                                                1
                                     Fˆ fric z  balls mv1  e  cos 2                                  (8)
                                                2

Now we can use Equation 7 above and Equations 2 and 4 from TP A.5 to find the tangential component of
the post-impact cue ball velocity:

                                               Fˆ fric t        1                         
                        vt 0  v sin            v sin  1  balls 1  e  cos 
                                                                                                             (9)
                                                 m              2                         

The vertical component of the friction impulse changes the angular momentum of the cue ball during impact.
Refer to the figure below. The momentum about the x-axis changes according to:

                                     I xo  I x  R cos Fˆ fric z                                      (12)

and about the y-axis according to:

                                     I yo  I y  R sin  Fˆ fric z                                     (13)

                                                 impact forces

                                           2
                                                     Fz

                                      Ft                   Fn
                                                                      Ft

                                                            Fz
                                           y                                   Rcos( )
                                                                 1
                                                    x
                                                                     Rsin()

 Note: The tangential component of the friction impulse affects the z-axis spin of the ball, but this has
 negligible effect on the cue ball trajectory (see TP A.4).
Therefore, using Equations 1 and 8, the post-impact angular speed about the x-axis is:

                   R cos Fˆ fric z    v 5 v1  e  cos3   v  5                            
     xo   x                          balls                  balls 1  e  cos 3    1                      (16)
                      2                  R        4R              R4                              
                        mR 2
                      5
and about the y-axis is:

              R sin  Fˆ fric z      5balls v1  e sin   cos 2   v  5                                
  yo   y                       0                                       balls 1  e sin   cos 2   (17)
                  2                                   4R                    R4                                  
                    mR 2
                  5

The normal and tangential speed components for the cue ball need to be projected into the x and y
directions to be able to use the analysis in TP A.4. The figure below shows how the components are
related.
                                                 y
                                             n
                                                                     t
                                                                     
                                                                           x

 Using Equations 2 and 9, the x and y components of the post-impact cue ball velocity can be expressed as:

                      v x 0  vt 0 cos   vn 0 sin        sin   cos 1  e   balls 1  e  cos 
                                                               v
                                                                                                                          (18)
                                                               2

             v y 0  vt 0 sin    vn 0 cos  
                                                      v
                                                      2
                                                          
                                                        sin 2  2   balls 1  e  cos   (1  e) cos 2      (19)

 Now that we know the cue ball post-impact velocity components (Equations 11, 12, and 13), we can
 use the results from TP A.4 to see the effect on the cue ball trajectory. Equations 24 and 25 from TP
 A.4 describe the cue ball trajectory:
                                                                  gvCxo 2
                                              x(t )  v xo t              t                                              (20)
                                                                  2vCo
                                                                  gvCyo
                                              y (t )  v yo t             t2                                             (21)
                                                                   2vCo

  From Equation 14 in TP A.4, the numerator terms are:

                                                      vCxo  v xo  R yo                                                 (22)

                                                      vCyo  v yo  R xo                                                 (23)
      From Equation 15 in TP A.4, the denominator term is:

                                                                    2       2
                                                   vCo  vCxo  vCyo                                       (24)

      From Equation 20 in TP A.4, the time required for the cue ball to begin rolling is:

                                                                 2vCo
                                                          t                                              (25)
                                                                 7 g

      From Equations 21 and 22 in TP A.4, the final cue ball velocity components are:

                                                 v xf 
                                                          1
                                                            5vxo  2 R yo                               (26)
                                                          7

                                                 v yf 
                                                          1
                                                            5v yo  2 R xo                              (27)
                                                          7

      From Equation 23 in TP A.4, the final deflected cue ball angle is:

                                                                  5v xo  2 R yo 
                                                  c  tan 1                     
                                                                                    
                                                                  5v yo  2 R  xo 
                                                                                                           (28)

Here are typical values for the parameters used in the equations along with the MathCAD forms of the results:

         e  0.94               coefficient of restitution between balls

         μballs  0.06          average coefficient of friction between the balls

         ϕ  30 deg            half-ball hit

         μ  0.2                coefficient of friction between the cue ball and table cloth:

                  g
         g 
                                 acceleration due to gravity               g  9.807
                m
                 2
                s 
         v  2                  average pre-impact cue ball speed in m/s

                2.25
                         in     ball radius
                  2
         R 
                    m
initial cue ball velocity components:

       ωx0 v ϕ e μballs     μballs  ( 1  e)  cos( ϕ)  1
                                v 5
                              R 4             
                                                                   3
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                       from Equation 16

       ωy0 v ϕ e μballs     μballs  ( 1  e)  sin( ϕ)  cos( ϕ) 
                                v      5
                              R 4             
                                                                               2
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                       from Equation 17

                                           v
                             
       v x0 v ϕ e μballs 
                                           2
                                                sin( ϕ)  cos( ϕ)  1  e  μballs  ( 1  e)  cos( ϕ)
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                       from Equation 18

                                           v 
                                           sin( ϕ)  2  μballs  ( 1  e)  cos( ϕ)  ( 1  e)  cos( ϕ) 
                                                     2                                                        2
       v y0 v ϕ e μballs                                                                                                                       from Equation 19
                                           2                                                                

vC terms from TP A.4 used in several Equations:

                                                                                 
       v Cx0 v ϕ e μballs  v x0 v ϕ e μballs  R ωy0 v ϕ e μballs                                                               from Equation 22

                                                                                 
       v Cy0 v ϕ e μballs  v y0 v ϕ e μballs  R ωx0 v ϕ e μballs                                                               from Equation 23

                             
       v C0 v ϕ e μballs                         
                                               v Cx0 v ϕ e μballs                 2  vCy0v ϕ e μballs2                                 from Equation 24

 time required for the cue ball to start rolling (cease sliding):

                                                             
                                               2  v C0 v ϕ e μballs               
                  
          Δt v ϕ e μballs                               7  μ g
                                                                                                                                                       from Equation 25

 velocity components when the cue ball starts rolling in a straight line:
                                                1
                      
          v xf v ϕ e μballs            7
                                                                                             
                                                     5 v x0 v ϕ e μballs  2  R ωy0 v ϕ e μballs                                     from Equation 26

                                                1
                      
          v yf v ϕ e μballs            7
                                                                                              
                                                     5  v y0 v ϕ e μballs  2  R ωx0 v ϕ e μballs                                   from Equation 27

 the final deflected cue ball angle:

                                                                                                   
                                            5  vx0 v ϕ e μballs  2  R ωy0 v ϕ e μballs                                          
                                      
              θc v ϕ e μballs  atan                                                                                                          from Equation 28
                                                                                                   
                                            5  vy0 v ϕ e μballs  2  R ωx0 v ϕ e μballs                                          

 x position of the cue ball during the curved trajectory:

                                                                                                                
                                                                                             μ g  v Cx0 v ϕ e μballs          2
                                               
       x c t v ϕ e μballs  v x0 v ϕ e μballs  t                                                                       t            from Equation 20
                                                                                                            
                                                                                               2  v C0 v ϕ e μballs       
x position of the cue ball during and after the curve trajectory:

                                 
         x t v ϕ e μballs                      
                                          ΔT  Δt v ϕ e μballs           
                                              
                                          x c t v ϕ e μballs if t  ΔT
                                          x c ΔT v ϕ e μballs  vxf  v ϕ e μballs   ( t  ΔT) otherwise

y position of the cue ball during the curved trajectory:

                                                                                           
                                                                          μ g  v Cy0 v ϕ e μballs         2
                                            
         y c t v ϕ e μballs  v y0 v ϕ e μballs  t                                              t             from Equation 21
                                                                                       
                                                                               2  v C0 v ϕ e μballs   

y position of the cue ball during and after the curve trajectory:

                                         
                   y t v ϕ e μballs                   
                                                  ΔT  Δt v ϕ e μballs          
                                                     
                                                  y c t v ϕ e μballs if t  ΔT
                                                  y c ΔT v ϕ e μballs  vyf  v ϕ e μballs   ( t  ΔT) otherwise

  Parameters used in the plot below:
                  T  4                                            number of seconds to display
                  t  0 0.05  T                                0.1 second plotting increment

 Equation for the tangent line:
                                 t
           x tangent_line( t)   2
                                T
              y tangent_line( t)  x tangent_line( t)  tan( ϕ)
                                                                         half-ball hit with natural roll

                               0.8

y( t v ϕ 1 0)
                               0.6
 
y t v ϕ 1 μballs   
y( t v ϕ e 0)

ytangent_line ( t)
                               0.4

                               0.2

                                0
                                     0            0.2                      0.4                       0.6                      0.8
                                                                                         
                                            x( t v ϕ 1 0) x t v ϕ 1 μballs x( t v ϕ e 0) xtangent_line ( t)

                        final deflected cue ball angle:

                                         θc( v ϕ 1 0 )  33.67  deg                                      with no ball inelasticity or friction

                                                                 
                                         θc v ϕ 1 μballs  35.907 deg                                    with ball friction only

                                         θc( v ϕ e 0 )  31.988 deg                                      with ball inelasticity only

                                                                
                                         θc v ϕ e μballs  34.026 deg                                    with ball inelasticity and friction

            So friction lengthens the cue ball angle, and inelasticity shortens the cue ball angle.
                                 With both, the angle is changed only a little.
Here's how cue ball angle varies with cut angle (with ball ineleasticity and friction):

                                                        ϕ  0  deg 1  deg  90 deg

                               40

                               30

         
      θc v ϕ e μballs    20
               deg

                               10

                                0
                                     0                  20                   40                  60                  80
                                                                                  ϕ
                                                                                  deg

  Here are CB deflection angles for standard ball-hit fractions:

                        from TP A.23:                        f ( ϕ)  1  sin( ϕ)              ϕ( f )  asin( 1  f )

               1
        f 
               8
                                         ϕf  ϕ( f )  61.045 deg                                         
                                                                                        θc v ϕf e μballs  19.75 deg

               1
        f 
               4
                                         ϕf  ϕ( f )  48.59 deg                                          
                                                                                        θc v ϕf e μballs  27.18 deg

               1
        f 
               2
                                         ϕf  ϕ( f )  30 deg                                             
                                                                                        θc v ϕf e μballs  34.026 deg

               3
        f 
               4
                                         ϕf  ϕ( f )  14.478 deg                                         
                                                                                        θc v ϕf e μballs  28.399 deg

               7
        f 
               8
                                         ϕf  ϕ( f )  7.181 deg                                          
                                                                                        θc v ϕf e μballs  17.251 deg
  Here is the maximum CB angle () and corresponding cut angle (max ) for the various cases:

                                                        ϕ  30 deg        initial guess

          with no ball inelasticity or friction:
                   θ( ϕ)  θc( v ϕ 1 0 )          ϕmax  Maximize( θ ϕ)  28.126 deg                
                                                                                                         θ ϕmax  33.749 deg

          with ball friction only:

                                   
                   θ( ϕ)  θc v ϕ 1 μballs       ϕmax  Maximize( θ ϕ)  26.443 deg                
                                                                                                         θ ϕmax  36.21  deg

          with ball inelasticity only:

                   θ( ϕ)  θc( v ϕ e 0 )          ϕmax  Maximize( θ ϕ)  28.995 deg                
                                                                                                         θ ϕmax  32.009 deg

          with ball inelasticity and friction:

                                   
                   θ( ϕ)  θc v ϕ e μballs       ϕmax  Maximize( θ ϕ)  27.468 deg                
                                                                                                         θ ϕmax  34.173 deg

Here is how the ratio of CB angle to cut angle varies with cut angle (with ball inelasticity and friction):

                                                                 ϕ  0.01 deg 0.05 deg  15 deg

                                   3

                                 2.5

                                   2

           
        θc v ϕ e μballs    1.5
                   ϕ

                                   1

                                 0.5

                                   0
                                        0                        5                            10                       15
                                                                               ϕ
                                                                              deg

               See TP B.13 to see how the flattness of this curve at low cut angles can be useful. See also:

               https://billiards.colostate.edu/faq/cue-ball-control/where-cb-goes/
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_7_the_effects_of_sidespin_on_the_90_degree_rule.pdf
title: TP A.7 - The effects of English on the 90° rule
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                     technical proof
                                         TP A.7
                         The effects of English on the 90° rule
                                           supporting:
                         “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                   http://billiards.colostate.edu
                          by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                  originally posted: 2/25/2005       last revision: 2/2/2009

              This technical proof is based on the background presented in TP A.5,
                       assuming a perfect coefficient of restitution (e = 1).

 From Equations 7 and 9, the normal components of the post-impact velocities are:
                            v1n '  0                    v2 n '  v1 cos 

 The direction of the tangential impulse depends on the direction and amount of English, which
 affect the relative speed of the point of contact at impact (see the figure below). The speed of
 this point (C) in the tangential direction is given by:

                                        vCt  v1 sin    R

                         point of contact (C)             Ft
                              at impact                              spin ()
                                                                  from English
                                                     1

                                                 v        

   The tangential impulse is in the direction shown in the figure if v Ct > 0 (e.g., with inside English
   or no English), is in the opposite direction if v Ct < 0 (e.g., with extreme outside English), and is
   zero if v Ct = 0 (when outside English exactly cancels the tangential sliding motion). Therefore,
   from Equations 11 and 12, assuming maximum friction is acting (se TP A.5 and TP A.14 for
   more information), the tangential components of the post-impact velocities are:

                        v2t '  v1 cos                    v1t '  v1 sin     cos 
    where the multiplier  is defined based on the sign of vCt according to:

                                                 1 vCt  0
                                                
                                              0 vCt  0
                                                 1 v  0
                                                     Ct

     From Equations 13 and 14, the ball trajectory angles after impact are:

                                     v '                               v '
                     1  tan 1  1n   0                2  tan 1  2t   tan 1  
                                     v1t '                              v2 n ' 

     so the final angle between the balls, from Equation 15, is:

                                      90  1   2  90  tan 1  

     Here are some example values:

                     μ  0.06        (average coefficient of friction between balls)

       θ2 ( σ μ)  atan( σ μ)               θ( σ μ)  90 deg  θ2 ( σ μ)

For a shot with inside English or no English ( = 1),

              θ2 ( 1 μ)  3.434 deg                  θ( 1 μ)  86.566 deg

the object ball angle is shortened (i.e., the object ball is thrown forward).

For a shot with just enough outside English to create "gearing" (no sliding) at contact
(i.e.,  = 0),
              θ2 ( 0 μ)  0 deg                      θ( 0 μ)  90 deg

the 90 degree rule applies exactly.

For a shot with an excess of outside English ( = -1),

              θ2 ( 1 μ)  3.434 deg                θ( 1 μ)  93.434 deg

the object ball angle is lengthened (i.e., the object ball is thrown backward).
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_8_the_effects_of_sidespin_on_the_30_degree_rule.pdf
title: TP A.8 - The effects of English on the 30° rule
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
technical proof                                                                                                   technical proof

                                                    TP A.8
                                    The effects of English on the 30° rule
                                                     supporting:
                                   “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                               http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                     by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                   originally posted: 2/26/05          last revision: 8/11/05

                     This technical proof is based on the background presented in TP A.6,
                   assuming a perfect coefficient of restitution (e = 1). The Equation numbers
                    below match the numbers in TP A.6. Only differences are shown, so not
                               all Equations are included (see TP A.6 for details).

    The total angular velocity of the cue ball, assuming it is rolling with English is:
                                                       r         vˆ
                                                      ω=−          i + ωkˆ                                                 (1)
                                                                 R

    Therefore, the total velocity of the point of contact (B) between the cue ball and the object ball, at impact, is:

r    r r r                    v
vB = v + ω × rB / O = vˆj + (− iˆ + ωkˆ) × R (− sin (φ )iˆ + cos(φ ) ˆj ) = − Rω cos(φ )iˆ + (v − Rω sin (φ )) ˆj − v cos(φ )kˆ
                              R
                                                                                                                           (3)

    From the figure below, the t and n components of a velocity vector are related to the x and y components
    according to:

                          v = vt iˆ + v n ˆj = (v x cos(φ ) + v y sin (φ ))tˆ + (v y cos(φ ) − v x sin (φ ))nˆ
                          r

                                                                  y
                                                      n
                                                             φ               t
                                                                             φ
                                                                                 x

    Eliminating the normal component of the velocity in Equation 3, we can express the relative sliding velocity vector
    for the point of contact as:
                                              r
                                              vrel = [v sin (φ ) − Rω ]tˆ − v cos(φ )
                                                                                                                             (4)

    Therefore, the friction impulse can be expressed as:
                                         r                        [v sin (φ ) − Rω ]tˆ − v cos(φ )kˆ 
                                         v rel
                   F fric = − µ balls Fn r = − µ balls mv cos(φ )
                   ˆ                  ˆ                                                                                         (6)
                                         v rel                     [v sin (φ ) − Rω ] + (v cos(φ )) 
                                                                                       2              2
The term in the denominator of Equation 6 can be simplified to:

                      [v sin(φ ) − Rω ]2 + (v cos(φ ))2 = v 2 − 2Rvω sin(φ ) + R 2ω 2

Therefore, the tangential component of the friction impulse (reversing the sign to match the direction
in TP A.5) is:

                                                                 v sin (φ ) − Rω                      (7)
                           Fˆ fric t = µ balls mv cos(φ )                                   
                                                           v 2 − 2 Rvω sin (φ ) + R 2ω 2 

and the vertical component is:

                                                                v cos(φ )                             (8)
                       Fˆ fric z = µ balls mv cos(φ )                                   
                                                       v 2 − 2 Rvω sin (φ ) + R 2ω 2 

The tangential component of the post-impact cue ball velocity is:

                                                                      Fˆ fric t
                                               vt 0 = v sin (φ ) −                                        (9)
                                                                         m

The post-impact angular speed about the x-axis is:

                                 R cos(φ )Fˆ fric z            v        5µ balls v 2 cos 3 (φ )
                 ω xo = ω x +                         =−         +
                                      2                        R 2 R v 2 − 2 Rvω sin (φ ) + R 2ω 2       (16)
                                        mR 2
                                      5
and about the y-axis is:

                                     R sin (φ )Fˆ fric z           5µ balls v 2 sin (φ ) cos 2 (φ )
                    ω yo = ω y +                           =
                                                               2 R v 2 − 2 Rvω sin (φ ) + R 2ω 2
                                          2                                                              (17)
                                            mR 2
                                          5

 The x and y components of the post-impact cue ball velocity can be expressed as:

                     v x 0 = vt 0 cos(φ ) − vn 0 sin (φ ) = v sin (φ ) cos(φ )(1 − µballs cos(φ ))       (18)

                            v y 0 = vt 0 sin (φ ) + vn 0 cos(φ ) = v sin 2 (φ )(1 − µballs cos(φ ))      (19)
Here are typical values for the parameters used in the equations along with the MathCAD forms of the results:

          µ balls := 0.06                             average coefficient of friction between the balls

          φ := 30⋅ deg                                half-ball hit

          µ := 0.2                                    coefficient of friction between the cue ball and table cloth:

                            g
          g :=
                                                      acceleration due to gravity (in m/s^2)                                   g = 9.807
                        m
                         2
                        s 
          v := 2                                      average pre-impact cue ball speed in m/s

                        2.25
                                ⋅ in
                            2
          R :=                                        ball radius (in meters)
                            m

                        v
          ω :=                                        average English
                        R

initial cue ball velocity components:

                                                                               5 ⋅ µ balls ⋅ v ⋅ cos( φ)
                                                                                             2             3

                (                              )     v
         ω x0 v , ω , φ , µ balls := −                       +                                                                             from Equation 16
                                                     R
                                                                     2 ⋅ R⋅ v − 2 ⋅ R⋅ v ⋅ ω ⋅ sin( φ) + R ⋅ ω
                                                                               2                                   2       2

                                                             5 ⋅ µ balls ⋅ v ⋅ sin( φ) ⋅ cos( φ)
                                                                                2                  2

                (
         ω y0 v , ω , φ , µ balls :=           )                                                                                           from Equation 17
                                                   2 ⋅ R⋅ v − 2 ⋅ R⋅ v ⋅ ω ⋅ sin( φ) + R ⋅ ω
                                                                     2                               2         2

                (                      )                                   (
         v x0 v , φ , µ balls := v ⋅ sin( φ) ⋅ cos( φ) ⋅ 1 − µ balls ⋅ cos( φ)                      )                                      from Equation 18

                    (                      )
          v y0 v , φ , µ balls := v ⋅ sin( φ) ⋅ 1 − µ balls ⋅ cos( φ)(                        )
                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                           from Equation 19

vC terms from TP A.4 used in several Equations:

                (                              )         (                     )
       v Cx0 v , ω , φ , µ balls := v x0 v , φ , µ balls − R⋅ ω y0 v , ω , φ , µ balls       (                         )                   from Equation 22

                (                              )         (                     )
       v Cy0 v , ω , φ , µ balls := v y0 v , φ , µ balls + R⋅ ω x0 v , ω , φ , µ balls       (                         )                   from Equation 23

            (
       v C0 v , ω , φ , µ balls :=         )                 (
                                                   v Cx0 v , ω , φ , µ balls          )2 + vCy0(v , ω , φ , µ balls)2                      from Equation 24
    time required for the cue ball to start rolling (cease sliding):

                                                                          (
                                                             2 ⋅ v C0 v , ω , φ , µ balls           )
                      (
                  ∆t v , ω , φ , µ balls :=      )                                7⋅ µ ⋅ g
                                                                                                                                                         from Equation 25

    velocity components when the cue ball starts rolling in a straight line:

                           (                         )                (             (                   )                 (                         ))
                                                                 1
                  v xf v , ω , φ , µ balls :=                        ⋅ 5 v x0 v , φ , µ balls + 2 ⋅ R⋅ ω y0 v , ω , φ , µ balls
                                                                 5                                                                                       from Equation 26

                           (                         )                (              (                  )                 (                         ))
                                                                 1
                  v yf v , ω , φ , µ balls :=                        ⋅ 5 ⋅ v y0 v , φ , µ balls − 2 ⋅ R⋅ ω x0 v , ω , φ , µ balls
                                                                 5                                                                                       from Equation 27

    the final deflected cue ball angle:

                                                                           5 ⋅ vx0( v , φ , µ balls) + 2⋅ R⋅ ω y0( v , ω , φ , µ balls ) 
                           (                         )
                      θ c v , ω , φ , µ balls := atan
                                                                           5 ⋅ vy0( v , φ , µ balls) − 2⋅ R⋅ ω x0( v , ω , φ , µ balls ) 
                                                                                                                                                         from Equation 28

    x position of the cue ball during the curved trajectory:

                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                  µ ⋅ g ⋅ v Cx0 v , ω , φ , µ balls        ) ⋅ t2
                  (                          )                    (
          x c t , v , ω , φ , µ balls := v x0 v , φ , µ balls ⋅ t −                          )                                                           from Equation 20
                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                        2 ⋅ v C0 v , ω , φ , µ balls   )

x position of the cue ball during and after the curve trajectory:

          (
         x t , v , ω , φ , µ balls :=)                                        (
                                                         ∆T ← ∆t v , ω , φ , µ balls                    )
                                                             (
                                                         x c t , v , ω , φ , µ balls) if t ≤ ∆T
                                                          xc( ∆T , v , ω , φ , µ balls ) + v xf ( v , ω , φ , µ balls ) ⋅ ( t − ∆T) otherwise

y position of the cue ball during the curved trajectory:

                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                 µ ⋅ g ⋅ v Cy0 v , ω , φ , µ balls     ) ⋅ t2
              (                          )                    (
         y c t , v , ω , φ , µ balls := v y0 v , φ , µ balls ⋅ t −                       )                                                               from Equation 21
                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                   2 ⋅ v C0 v , ω , φ , µ balls   )

y position of the cue ball during and after the curve trajectory:

                       (
                      y t , v , ω , φ , µ balls :=       )                               (
                                                                      ∆T ← ∆t v , ω , φ , µ balls                 )
                                                                          (
                                                                      y c t , v , ω , φ , µ balls) if t ≤ ∆T
                                                                       yc( ∆T , v , ω , φ , µ balls ) + v yf ( v , ω , φ , µ balls ) ⋅ ( t − ∆T) otherwise
       Parameters used in the plot below:
                         T := 4                                               number of seconds to display
                         t := 0 , 0.05 .. T                                   0.1 second plotting increment

    Equation for the tangent line:
                                    t
              x tangent_line( t) := ⋅ 2
                                   T
                        y tangent_line( t) := x tangent_line( t) ⋅ tan( φ)

                                                                                  half-ball hit with natural roll

                                    1

                                  0.8

y( t , v , 0 , φ , 0)
                                  0.6
 (
y t , v , 0 , φ , µ balls)
y( t , v , − ω , φ , µ balls)

y( t , v , 1.5ω , φ , µ balls )

ytangent_line ( t)                0.4

                                  0.2

                                    0
                                        0                          0.2                         0.4                         0.6                          0.8                         1
                                                                   (                      ) (                           ) (                             )
                                              x( t , v , 0 , φ , 0) , x t , v , 0 , φ , µ balls , x t , v , − ω , φ , µ balls , x t , v , 1.5ω , φ , µ balls , xtangent_line ( t)
      final deflected cue ball angle:

                             θ c( v , 0 , φ , 0 ) = 33.67 deg                                        with no friction or English

                                (                     )
                             θ c v , 0 , φ , µ balls = 35.907 deg                                    with no English (this agrees with TP A.6)

                                (                      )
                             θ c v , ω , φ , µ balls = 35.907 deg                                    with "gearing" outside English

                                (                              )
                             θ c v , 1.5ω , φ , µ balls = 35.133 deg                                 with excess outside English

                                (                          )
                             θ c v , −ω , φ , µ balls = 34.574 deg                                   with inside English

                                (                              )
                             θ c v , −2 ω , φ , µ balls = 33.955 deg                                 with excess inside English

So excess outside English and inside English both shorten the cue ball angle, but not as much as
the amount ball friction (without English) lengthens the angle. In any case, the effects are small.

                                           The effects of English if there were no ball friction:

                                1

                              0.8

  y( t , v , 0 , φ , 0)
                              0.6
  y( t , v , 0 , φ , 0)

  y( t , v , − ω , φ , 0)

  y( t , v , 1.5ω , φ , 0)

  ytangent_line ( t)          0.4

                              0.2

                                0
                                    0                          0.2                  0.4                       0.6                       0.8                       1
                                        x( t , v , 0 , φ , 0) , x( t , v , 0 , φ , 0) , x( t , v , − ω , φ , 0) , x( t , v , 1.5ω , φ , 0) , xtangent_line ( t)

                                        English would have no effect if there were no ball friction
                                        The effects of changing ball friction on roll shots with no English:

                             1

                            0.8

y( t , v , 0 , φ , 0)

 (
y t , v , 0 , φ , µ balls) 0.6
y( t , v , 0 , φ , 0.5µ balls)

y( t , v , 0 , φ , 1.5µ balls)
                            0.4
ytangent_line ( t)

                            0.2

                             0
                                  0                        0.2                         0.4                          0.6                          0.8                         1
                                                            (                     ) (                             ) (                            )
                                      x( t , v , 0 , φ , 0) , x t , v , 0 , φ , µ balls , x t , v , 0 , φ , 0.5µ balls , x t , v , 0 , φ , 1.5µ balls , xtangent_line ( t)
                                      The effects of changing ball friction on roll shots with inside English:

                                     1

                                    0.8

y( t , v , − ω , φ , 0)
                                    0.6
 (
y t , v , − ω , φ , µ balls)
y( t , v , − ω , φ , 0.5µ balls )

y( t , v , − ω , φ , 1.5µ balls )

ytangent_line ( t)                  0.4

                                    0.2

                                     0
                                          0                         0.2                           0.4                            0.6                           0.8
                                                                      (                        ) (                              ) (                              )
                                              x( t , v , − ω , φ , 0) , x t , v , − ω , φ , µ balls , x t , v , − ω , φ , 0.5µ balls , x t , v , − ω , φ , 1.5µ balls , xtangent_line (
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_a_9_cue_accelerometer_measurements.pdf
title: TP A.9 - Cue stick accelerometer measurements
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                   technical proof
                                     TP A.9
                     Cue stick accelerometer measurements
                                        supporting:
                      “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                               http://billiards.colostate.edu
                       by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                   originally posted: 3/8/2005     last revision: 4/14/2011

                   These plots below are courtesy of the Billiard SportKlub Union
      out of Austria (http://www.bskunion.at ). The shots were performed by Andreas Efler,
                              an Austrian three-cushion professional.

 The photograph below shows the equipment used to take the measurements. A two-axis
 accelerometer is mounted to the butt end of the cue stick. The sensor measures acceleration
 in the cue stick impact direction (Y) and in the sideways deflection (squirt) direction (X).
 Acceleration is the rate of change of speed. When the acceleration is positive, the speed is
 increasing; when the acceleration is negative, the speed is decreasing; and when the
 acceleration is zero, the speed is constant.
In the plots below, the blue curve represents the cue stick acceleration in the impact direction and
the red curve represents acceleration in the sideways direction. The beginning humps in the blue
curve represent the practice strokes. When the acceleration is positive, the cue stick is speeding up
in a forward swing (or slowing down in a back-swing). When the acceleration is negative, the cue
stick is slowing down in a forward swing (or speeding up in a back-swing). Notice the peak in
acceleration just before impact. This corresponds to a big increase in forward speed in the final
stroke. At impact, the acceleration goes negative, corresponding to a drop in cue stick speed. The
positive acceleration hump after impact probably corresponds to the hand grip responding to the
slowing that occurred at impact (see HSV A.34). The spikes in both curves during impact are
probably the result of shock waves. The oscillation in the red curve after impact corresponds to
vibration of the cue stick.

                                                                                                         soft follow shot:

                                                         Acceleration Graph Andreas Endrunner Gentle
                                                                                                   Side Deflection                 Queue Acceleration

                    2.5

                      2

                    1.5

                      1

                    0.5
 Acceleration (g)

                      0

                    -0.5

                     -1

                    -1.5

                     -2

                    -2.5
                           534.959

                                     535.153

                                               535.315

                                                           535.590

                                                                     535.782

                                                                               535.942

                                                                                         536.119

                                                                                                   536.313

                                                                                                             536.539

                                                                                                                       536.711

                                                                                                                                 536.877

                                                                                                                                           537.074

                                                                                                                                                     537.271

                                                                                                                                                               537.446

                                                                                                                                                                         537.689

                                                                                                                                                                                   537.886

                                                                                                                                                                                             538.077

                                                                                                                                                                                                       538.249

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 538.445

                                                                                                                       Tim e (s)
                                                                  soft draw shot:

                                            Acceleration Graph Andreas Drawback Soft
                                                                    Side Deflection        Queue Acceleration

                   4

                   3

                   2
Acceleration (g)

                   1

                   0

                   -1

                   -2

                   -3
                        676.433

                                  676.628

                                             676.826

                                                        676.986

                                                                    677.238

                                                                                677.440

                                                                                                677.621

                                                                                                            677.789

                                                                                                                        677.970

                                                                                                                                    678.183

                                                                                                                                                678.350
                                                                                   Tim e (s)

                                                             firm center-ball hit shot:

                                            Acceleration Graph Andreas Central Strong
                                                                   Side Deflection        Queue Acceleration

                   5

                   4

                   3

                   2
Acceleration (g)

                   1

                   0

                   -1

                   -2

                   -3
                        611.407

                                  611.574

                                             611.826

                                                       612.016

                                                                   612.178

                                                                               612.354

                                                                                               612.554

                                                                                                          612.735

                                                                                                                      612.930

                                                                                                                                  613.125

                                                                                                                                              613.419

                                                                                  Tim e (s)
Here is some data from another source (John Pizutto). For more info, see:
http://jandssafeguard.com/PoolGizmo/Stroke-Alyzer.html
                                          center ball hit:

                                           off-center hit:

         Notice the "ringing" in the sideways acceleration of the cue stick well after impact.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_10_draw_shot_cue_elevation_effects.pdf
title: TP B.10 - Draw shot cue elevation effects
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                    technical proof
                                           TP B.10
                                Draw shot cue elevation effects
                                             supporting:
                         “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                         http://billiards.colostate.edu
                              by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                  originally posted: 5/15/2009                last revision: 11/9/2023

                                                                          v0
                                                                        0

                                          vs                       R

                                                                  mb
                               s        ms
                                                                                 b

                                                      a) cue stick impact

                                                                       di+1
                         i                                                                         i+1
            vi                                 vi+1                                         vi+1
 i                                                    i+1                          i+1

                                    Ft
                    Fn
                                                        b) CB bounce
The data and equations on this page are from TP B.9.
        Relevant physical parameters:
                            R := 1.125 in              ball radius
                                          R
                            b max :=                    generally accepted miscue limit
                                           2
                             μs := 0.2                  typical ball-cloth coefficient of sliding friction
                                    6
                             mr :=                      typical ball-mass-to-cue-mass ratio (mb/ms):
                                   19

                             η := 0.87                  typical cue tip efficiency

                             et := 0.6                  typical ball-table coefficient of restitution

                                          rpm min
                             rps :=                     revs per second
                                               sec

                             vs := 12 mph              typical fast cue speed

     Speed and spin loss, and spin ratio, for a sliding CB (e.g., with a level-cue draw shot):
                                                2                                                5        2              
                   vdrag( v , x) :=            v - 2  μs g x        ωdrag( v , ω , x) := ω -      v - v - 2  μs g x
                                                                                                2 R                     
                                                                                  ωdrag( v , ω , x)  R
                                                     drag_ratio ( v , ω , x) :=
                                                                                     vdrag( v , x)

     CB speed and spin from cue speed (vs) and tip offset (b):

                                                        1-η      5 b 
                                                                                    2
                                           1+        η-      1 +    
                                                         mr      2 R                                 5               b
                    (         )
                vCB vs , b := vs                                                                   (         )   (    )
                                                                                            ωCB vs , b :=  vCB vs , b 
                                                                          2                            2                 2
                                                     1 + mr +    
                                                              5 b                                                        R
                                                             2 R 

     Typical fast cue speed with near-maximum tip offset:
                                           vs := 15 mph                 b := b max = 0.563 in

     Cue ball (CB) speed, spin, and angle after tip impact:

                                      (         )
                     v := vCB vs , b = 11.194 mph
                        0                                                                       (         )
                                                                                  ω := ωCB vs , b = 34.841 rps
                                                                                    0

     NOTE - I will assume the cue tip delivers most of its impulse to the CB before any
     significant force build up between the CB and the table (due to cloth compression and
     rebound off the slate). This assumption is supported by HSV B.44 for modest cue
     elevations.
On each bounce of the CB, including the first bounce after tip impact, the ball speed, spin, and
angle change according to impact-momentum principles. See the illustrations on the 1st page for
the terminology used.

The normal and tangential components of the incoming velocity are:
                   vn = v  sin θ
                      i      i            ( i)                                                 vt = v  cos θ
                                                                                                   i       i     ( i)
After the bounce, the normal component is reduced according to the coefficient of restitution
between the ball and table:
                                                 vn
                                                      i+1
                                                            = et  vn = et  v  sin θ
                                                                           i             i     ( i)
The normal impulse corresponding to this momentum change is:

                                     F'n = mb  vn + vn
                                                  i    (i+ 1                   )
                                                             = mb  1 + et  sin θ  v
                                                                                  i i        (                 ) ( )
Assuming the ball still has backspin after rebound (i.e., ωi+1>0), the tangential impulse will be:

                                             F't = μs F'n = μs mb  1 + et  sin θ  v
                                                                                    i i  (             ) ( )
This changes the tangential momentum, resulting in a post-rebound tangential speed of:

                                                                F't
                                     vt
                                      i+ 1
                                                 = vt -
                                                       i        mb                       ( )               (
                                                                          = v  cos θ - μs 1 + et  sin θ 
                                                                             i       i                    i          ) ( )
The total post-rebound speed is:

                           (vni+1) + (vti+1) = vi (et sin(θi)) + cos(θi) - μs (1 + et) sin(θi)
                                            2                    2                                     2                                  2
              v       =
              i+ 1

The tangential impulse also changes the angular momentum, resulting in a post-rebound spin of:

                                          F't  R                         F't  R                          5
                  ω
                   i+1
                          =ω -
                                 i           I
                                                      =ω -
                                                            i         2              2
                                                                                         =ω -
                                                                                               i       2 R
                                                                                                                   (       ) ( i) i
                                                                                                                μs 1 + et  sin θ  v
                                                                           mb  R
                                                                      5

The trajectory angle after the bounce is:

                           vni+1                     et  sin( θ )            
                                                                                  = atan                          
                                                                                                       et
                  = atan           = atan                       i
          θ
           i+ 1            vti+ 1         cos( θi) - μs ( 1 + et)  sin( θi)          cot( θi) - μs ( 1 + et) 
                                                                                                                 

From basic projectile motion, the distance covered in the air after the bounce is:

                                                                     (vi+1)  sin 2 θ
                                                                                         2

                                                            d
                                                              i+ 1
                                                                   =
                                                                        g        ( i+1)
Here's a program to calculate the CB spin and spin ratio at OB contact for a given cue
elevation and drag distance:

                     (         )
      elev_draw_shot θs , d drag :=   d total  0

                                      θ  θs
                                       0
                                      i0
                                              (
                                      while d total < d drag                 )
                                         "the CB hasn't reached the OB yet"

                                              (i )
                                         if θ = 0

                                                  "drag with no more bounces"
                                                  x  d drag - d total

                                                  d          x
                                                      i+1
                                                  v
                                                    i+ 1      (i )
                                                              vdrag v , x

                                                  ω      ωdrag( v , ω , x)
                                                   i+ 1           i i
                                                  θ          0
                                                      i+1
                                                  ii+1
                                                  break
                                         "otherwise, the CB will bounce"
                                         vn
                                              i+ 1            ( i)
                                                        et  v  sin θ
                                                                  i
                                         vt       v  cos( θ ) - μs ( 1 + et)  sin( θ )
                                            i+ 1    i        i                          i

                                                              (vni+1) + (vti+1)
                                                                           2            2
                                         v          
                                          i+ 1
                                                                       5
                                         ω
                                             i+ 1
                                                      ω -
                                                              i       2 R
                                                                                    (       ) ( i) i
                                                                              μs 1 + et  sin θ  v

                                              ( i+1              ) ( i+1 < 0)
                                         if  v              <0  ω

                                                  "CB doesn't make it to the OB with draw"
                                                  v          0
                                                    i+ 1
                                                  ω          0
                                                      i+ 1
                                                  ii+1
                                                  break
                                                                              et           
                                         θ             atan 
                                             i+1                   cot( θi) - μs ( 1 + et)
                                                                                            

                                                 (vi+1)  sin 2 θ
                                                                      2

                                         d
                                           i+1
                                               
                                                    g        ( i+1)
                                         d total  d total + d
                                                                                 i+ 1
                                                                                                           i+ 1

                                                                          ( i+1                        ) ( i+1 < 1deg)
                                                                     if  d                < 0.1 in  θ

                                                                              "assume the bouncing ceases"
                                                                              θ        0
                                                                               i+1
                                                                     ii+1
                                                            spin  ω
                                                                                  i
                                                                                      ω R
                                                                                       i
                                                            ratio 
                                                                               v  cos θ
                                                                                  i            ( i)
                                                            "return all calculated data"
                                                                                        T
                                                            i d v    ω   θ spin       
                                                                                ratio 
                                                             ft mph rps deg rps       

Functions to extract spin and spin-to-speed ratio from the program results:

       (            )
   spin θs , d drag := elev_draw_shot θs , d drag 5 (                     )                            (              )                          (
                                                                                                   ratio θs , d drag := elev_draw_shot θs , d drag 6     )

For a level cue, the program results are the same as for a drag shot:
    θs := 0  deg        d drag := 2  ft                             (
                                                                spin θs , d drag = 31.43       )                              (         )
                                                                                                                       ratio θs , d drag = 1.186

                                                            (
                                              ωdrag v , ω , d drag = 31.43 rps
                                                     0 0                                   )                                          (0 0           )
                                                                                                                       drag_ratio v , ω , d drag = 1.186

Here are some example data at a typical cue elevation and medium drag distance:
        θs := 5  deg            d drag := 2  ft                results := elev_draw_shot θs , d drag            (               )
                N := results = 7                        number of bounces
                                    0

                db := results                           distances between bounces (in feet)
                                     1
                        db = 0.848            db = 0.5                            db = 0.297                      db = 0.177            db = 0.106
                          1                         2                                  3                              4                      5

                vb := results                           ball speed after each bounce (in mph)
                                     2
                        vb = 10.855 vb = 10.658                                   vb = 10.542                     vb = 10.473           vb = 10.432
                          1                         2                                  3                              4                      5

                ωb := results                           ball spin after each bounce (in rps)
                                        3
                        ωb = 32.897             ωb = 31.731                           ωb = 31.031                 ωb = 30.612           ωb = 30.36
                             1                          2                                      3                       4                     5

                θb := results                           ball bounce angle (in deg)
                                     4
                        θb = 3.091              θb = 1.889                                θb = 1.145                  θb = 0.692        θb = 0.417
                          1                             2                                       3                         4                  5

                results = 30.118
                         5                                       (
                                                        spin θs , d drag = 30.118     )
                results = 1.164
                         6                                       (
                                                        ratio θs , d drag = 1.164      )
Example data at higher cue elevation:

   θs := 12 deg        d drag := 2  ft                                                     (
                                                               results := elev_draw_shot θs , d drag          )
            N := results = 2                       number of bounces
                             0

            db := results                          distances between bounces (in feet)
                              1
                   db = 1.906            db = 1.093
                     1                         2

            vb := results                          ball speed after each bounce (in mph)
                              2
                   vb = 10.3             vb = 9.794
                     1                         2

            ωb := results                          ball spin after each bounce (in rps)
                                 3
                   ωb = 30.205             ωb = 27.423
                        1                          2

            θb := results                          ball bounce angle (in deg)
                              4
                   θb = 7.792              θb = 4.908
                     1                             2

            results = 27.423
                    5                                      (           )
                                                   spin θs , d drag = 27.423

            results = 1.129
                    6                                      (            )
                                                   ratio θs , d drag = 1.129

Comparing elevated before-bounce and after-bounce spin and ratio to a level-cue drag shot:

                                         original CB speed, spin, and spin ratio:
                                                                                                     ω R
                                                                                                      0
                            v = 11.194 mph                           ω = 34.841 rps                             = 1.25
                             0                                         0                              v
                                                                                                          0

just before the second bounce:                             d drag := 1.905 ft

                                                                                                 (
                                                                                        ωdrag v , ω , d drag  R          )
                                           (                      )
                                                                                               0 0
               level cue:            ωdrag v , ω , d drag = 31.596 rps                                                       = 1.189
                                            0 0
                                                                                                      (
                                                                                             vdrag v , d drag
                                                                                                    0                 )
             elevated cue:                             (          )
                                           spin θs , d drag = 30.205                     (                )
                                                                                   ratio θs , d drag = 1.189

just after the second bounce:                              d drag := 1.907 ft

                                                                                                 (
                                                                                        ωdrag v , ω , d drag  R          )
                                           (                      )
                                                                                               0 0
               level cue:            ωdrag v , ω , d drag = 31.593 rps                                                       = 1.189
                                            0 0
                                                                                                      (
                                                                                             vdrag v , d drag
                                                                                                    0                 )
             elevated cue:                             (          )
                                           spin θs , d drag = 27.423                     (                )
                                                                                   ratio θs , d drag = 1.129
Now let's look at how spin and spin ratio vary with drag distance for a typical cue elevation,
as compared to a level-cue drag shot:

                      θs := 5  deg            d drag := 1  ft , 1.1 ft .. 4  ft

                                  34

                                  32

        (
   spin θs , ddrag      )
            (
   ωdrag v0 , ω0 , ddrag 30   )
                rps

                                  28

                                  26
                                       1         2                              3          4
                                                             ddrag

                                                                ft

                                  1.25

                                   1.2

    (
ratio θs , ddrag  )
                                  1.15
            (
drag_ratio v0 , ω0 , ddrag    )

                                   1.1

                                  1.05
                                           1         2                                3        4
                                                                ddrag

                                                                     ft

With a near level cue, there is little effect from the CB bouncing, and the CB doesn't bounce for
very long (see the small spikes in the curves on the left side of the graphs).
 Now let's look at how spin and spin ratio vary with drag distance for an elevated cue,
 as compared to a level-cue drag shot:

                       θs := 15 deg           d drag := 1  ft , 1.1 ft .. 4  ft

                                  34

                                  32

                                  30
         (
    spin θs , ddrag     )
             (
    ωdrag v0 , ω0 , ddrag 28  )
                 rps
                                  26

                                  24

                                  22
                                       1         2                              3         4
                                                             ddrag

                                                                ft

                                  1.25

                                   1.2

     (
 ratio θs , ddrag  )
                                  1.15
             (
 drag_ratio v0 , ω0 , ddrag   )

                                   1.1

                                  1.05
                                           1         2                                3       4
                                                                ddrag

                                                                     ft

Notice how both the spin and the spin ratio take "hits" after each bounce, but don't change while the
CB is in airborne between the bounces.
Now let's look at how spin and spin ratio vary with cue elevation,
as compared to a level-cue drag shot:

                       θs := 0  deg , 1  deg .. 30 deg         d drag := 2  ft

                                    32

                                    30

         (
    spin θs , ddrag      )          28

             (
    ωdrag v0 , ω0 , ddrag       )
                 rps                26

                                    24

                                    22
                                         0                  10                       20        30
                                                                        θs

                                                                        deg

                                    1.22

                                     1.2

     (
 ratio θs , ddrag  )                1.18

             (
 drag_ratio v0 , ω0 , ddrag     )
                                    1.16

                                    1.14

                                    1.12
                                             0               10                           20        30
                                                                             θs

                                                                             deg
The reasons for the spikes in the graphs above are related to the distances at which bounces occur
for different cue elevations. The following data explain the two spikes in the curves:

 θs := 9  deg                                 (
                     results := elev_draw_shot θs , d drag )                     (         )
                                                                             spin θs , d drag = 29.259

    N := results = 2
                 0
                              d := results
                                          1
                                               d + d = 2.331
                                                   1   2                             (         )
                                                                              ratio θs , d drag = 1.157

 θs := 10 deg                                 (
                     results := elev_draw_shot θs , d drag )                     (         )
                                                                             spin θs , d drag = 28.645

    N := results = 2
                 0
                              d := results
                                          1
                                               d + d = 2.561
                                                   1   2                             (         )
                                                                              ratio θs , d drag = 1.147

 θs := 15 deg                                 (
                     results := elev_draw_shot θs , d drag )                     (         )
                                                                             spin θs , d drag = 29.069

    N := results = 1
                 0
                              d := results
                                          1
                                               d = 2.298
                                                   1                                 (         )
                                                                              ratio θs , d drag = 1.181

 θs := 16 deg                                 (
                     results := elev_draw_shot θs , d drag )                     (         )
                                                                             spin θs , d drag = 28.694

    N := results = 1
                 0
                              d := results
                                          1
                                               d = 2.419
                                                   1                                 (         )
                                                                              ratio θs , d drag = 1.179

    Conclusions from all of the analysis and graphs above:

     1.   Elevating the cue reduces the amount of CB spin at OB contact, resulting in less draw
          distance (see TP B.8 for more info). The loss in spin is small for small cue elevations,
          but increases with more elevation (for a given cue speed and tip offset).

     2.   Modest cue elevations (about 0-15 degrees) reduce the spin-to-speed ratio of the CB at
          OB contact, resulting in "slower" draw (see TP B.9 for more info).

     3.   As you increase cue elevation above about 20 degrees, the spin-to-forward-speed ratio
          increases, allowing for "quicker" draw (see TP B.9 for more info). An extreme example is
          a highly elevated masse draw (pique) shot, where you create lots of backspin with very
          little forward speed.

  Sometimes cue elevation is required to clear over an obstacle ball, or to prevent a double hit
  when there is a small gap between the CB and OB. And as noted above, with larger cue
  elevations, better "quick draw" action can result. However, for maximum draw distance, a
  level cue (or as close to level is possible) appears to be best.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_11_shallow_angle_contact_point_mirror_kick_system.pdf
title: TP B.11 - Shallow-angle contact-point mirror kick system
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, banks_kicks_rails
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                     technical proof
                                     TP B.11
                  Shallow-angle contact-point mirror kick system
                                          supporting:
                        “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                   http://billiards.colostate.edu
                         by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                   originally posted: 5/19/2010             last revision: 5/19/2010

   The purpose of this analysis is to compare theoretical and experimental results to show why
   and when the shallow-angle contact-point mirror kick system is effective. For background
   information, illustrations, and more information, see my July '10 BD article.

                                                                                     m

                             in                                      out           m
                                                                                               

                                                                                                   D  2.25 in
                                                                                         m+R
                                                                                                            D
                                                                                                    R 
                                   R                       in                                              2
                                                                  x
                                                           out
                                                                                         m-R
                                                            d

                                                                                R

        From the illustration above,
                                                                       ( m  R)
                                            
                                           x θin m φ  
                                                                              
                                                                          tan θin
        and
                                                                 
                                        x = d  cos θout  R cos( φ)

                                                       
                                    m  R = d  sin θout  R sin( φ) 
        which can be solved (by eliminating d) to give:

                                                     m  R ( 1  sin( φ) ) 
                        θout θin m φ  atan
                                                                           
                                                                            
                                                  x θin m φ  R cos( φ)
      Cushion compression has an effect on the geometry, especially at faster speeds, but I
      neglect this effects in the analysis. I am assuming the speed is slow enough to not
      compress the cushion a significant amount. Also, the rebound path of the CB curves after
      rebound, with this curve being delayed more with faster speed. The effect of curve delay
      depends on how soon the CB hits the object after rebound. Because of this, I will compare
      the results to experimental data of both immediate rebound angle off the rail and effective
      rebound angle, after the CB is done curving.

      Here is experimental data for rebound angle vs. incoming angle for a slow rolling CB with no
      English (taken with Bob Jewett in Fort Collins, March, 2009)

               10                              5                                  3.5 
               20                              10.5                               8.4 
                                                                                       
               30                              23                                 16.9 
               40                              37                                 25.2 
      θein                   θeout_immed                        θeout_eff        
               50                              46                                 35.7 
               60                              56                                 48.7 
               70                              70                                 64.1 
                                                                                       
               80                              79.95                              75.5 

        where θein is the CB angle relative to the rail, θeout_immed is the immediate rebound
        angle off the rail (measured with the help of a high-speed video camera), and θeout_eff is
        the effective rebound angle as determined by where the CB hit a rail after rebound.

Here are values for the parameters for the system shots described in my July '10 BD article
(A: 1-ball shot, 1/2 ball off rail; B: 2-ball shot, full ball off rail; C: 3-ball shot, 1 1/2 ball off rail) :

               θin  5  deg 6  deg  45 deg

               φA  5  deg               φB  7.5 deg         φC  10 deg

               mA  D  R sin φA                                        
                                                     mB  ( D  R)  R sin φB                          
                                                                                    mC  2  D  R sin φC

When I tested the three shots on my table, shot "A" was over cut for a wide range of angles
from 5 to 45 degrees, with the largest over-cut occurring at larger angles. Shot "B" was
successful over quite a large range (5 to 37 degrees), with over cut occurring at larger angles.
Shot "C" was under cut at smaller angles (5 to 25 degrees), and was over cut at larger angles
(35 to 45 degrees). The shot was successful in the mid range (between 25 and 35 degrees), but
the speed was critical.
Here are plots comparing the rebound angle predicted by the system to the actually experimental
data:
                                       Shot "A" (the 1-ball shot) in the article

                              40
         
     θout θin mA φA   
             deg              30

     θeout_immed
                              20
     θeout_eff

                              10

                               0
                                   0          10          20               30       40
                                                           θin
                                                                 θein θein
                                                           deg

     Here, the actual rebound angles (from the experimental data) are larger than the angle
     predicted by the system, which explains why this shot is typically over cut, and by a
     wider margin at larger angles.

                                        Shot "B" (the 2-ball shot) in the article

                              40
                     
     θout θin mB φB

             deg              30

     θeout_immed
                              20
     θeout_eff

                              10

                               0
                                   0          10          20               30       40
                                                          θin
                                                                 θein θein
                                                          deg

      Here, the actual rebound angles (from the experimental data) are closer to and mostly
      bracket the angle predicted by the system over a wider range, which explains why the
      system works quite well for this shot.
                              Shot "C" (the 3-ball shot) in the article

                     40
                
θout θin mC φC

        deg          30

θeout_immed
                     20
θeout_eff

                     10

                      0
                          0         10         20               30        40
                                                θin
                                                      θein θein
                                                deg

Here, the actual rebound angles (from the experimental data) are smaller than the
angle predicted by the system at smaller approach angles, which explains why this
shot is typically under cut. At larger approach angles, the immediate rebound angle is
larger than predicted, explaining why the shot is over cut at larger angles.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_12_optimal_tip_height_for_speed_distance_control.pdf
title: TP B.12 - Optimal Tip Height for Speed/Distance Control
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                  technical proof
                                    TP B.12
                  Optimal Tip Height for Speed/Distance Control
                                         supporting:
                       “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                      http://billiards.colostate.edu
                        by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                  originally posted: 8/6/2011         last revision: 8/6/2011

                                                        full roll
before impact:         after impact:               (after skidding):                            final position:

                                                       vr = rR
                             vb                           r                                      v==0
          vs

         ms             mb                  x

                             R

                                           dskid                                droll

 Relevant physical parameters (from "physics" FAQ page):

                      μs  0.2            typical ball-cloth coefficient of sliding friction
                      μr  0.01           typical ball-cloth coefficient of rolling resistance
                      η  0.87            typical cue tip efficiency
                      R  1.125  in      ball radius
                            6
                      mr                 typical ball-mass-to-cue-mass ratio (m b /ms) [for a 19 oz cue]
                            19
                                  R
                      x max              safe miscue limit
                                  2

                      v s  3  mph       typical slow cue speed
From TP A.30, accounting for tip inefficiency, the CB speed and spin after impact are:

                                                        1η      5 x 
                                                                                         2
                                        1       η          1     
                                                         mr      2 R 
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                           5                            x
      v v s x η mr  v s                                                                   ω v s x η mr         v v s x η mr 
                                                                   2                                                     2                                2
                                                 1  mr    x  
                                                          5                                                                                             R
                                                         2  R 

From TP B.5, the distance required for a skidding (sliding) CB to develop natural roll, and
the speed when roll first develops, are:

                                                                   6  v  5v  R ω  ( R ω) 
                                                            2                2                              2
                            d skid v ω μs 
                                                        49 μs g

                                                                    5            2
                                             v skid( v ω)           v           R ω
                                                                    7            7

From TP 4.1, the distance required for a rolling ball to stop (assuming no cushion contact) is:
                                                                                     2
                                                                    
                                                                                 v
                                                       d roll v μr 
                                                                              2  μr g

Therefore, the total ball travel distance (assuming no cushion contact) for a given cue
speed is:

                                                                              
              d v s x η mr μs μr  d skid v v s x η mr ω v s x η mr μs       
                                                                                                
                                                      d roll v skid v v s x η mr ω v s x η mr μr   

Comparing typical skid and roll distances for a center-ball hit:

               x  0                                                                        
                                                                     v v s x η mr  3.824 mph

                       
    ω v s x η mr  0  rpm                                                    
                                                     v skid v v s x η mr ω v s x η mr          2.731  mph

                                                                              
                       d skid v v s x η mr ω v s x η mr μs  1.197  ft

                                                                                 
                   d roll v skid v v s x η mr ω v s x η mr μr  24.935 ft

                                                                 
                                    d skid v v s x η mr ω v s x η mr μs   
                                                                                                      4.8 %
                                d roll v skid v  v s x η mr ω v s x η mr  μr

So the the distance traveled, with typical values, depends mostly on the "speed"
(rolling resistance) of the cloth and not the "slickness" (sliding friction).
 Now let's look at how ball travel distance varies with tip contact-point height, for a given cue speed:

                                                              x  0 0.05 x max  x max

                                   35

                                   30

     
    d vs x η mr μs μr    25
                 ft

                                   20

                                   15
                                         0           0.1               0.2             0.3               0.4
                                                                                 x
                                                                                 R

                                                     x  Maximize(f x)
                                                                                        x                        x
   x  0      f ( x )  d v s x η mr μs μr                                        0.174                     34.864 %
                                                                                        R                      x max

With typical conditions, the optimal tip height appears to be about 17.5% of the ball radius
or about 35% of the maximum offset. At this tip height, the ball travel distance is least sensitive
to slight errors in tip height. So, for a given cue speed, the ball travel distance will be more
consistent from one shot to the next (with slight variance in tip height relative to the optimum). As
would be expected, the optimal tip height is the same regardless of the cue speed (although the
travel distance is obviously different for different cue speeds):

                                                                
                       f ( x )  d 2  mph x η mr μs μr              x  Maximize( f x )

                                             x                        x
                                                  0.174                      34.864 %          f ( x )  13.559 ft
                                             R                       x max

                                                                
                       f ( x )  d 3  mph x η mr μs μr              x  Maximize( f x )

                                             x                        x
                                                  0.174                      34.864 %          f ( x )  30.508 ft
                                             R                       x max
Ron Shepard, in his "Amateur Physics for the Amateur Pool Player" book, did a similar analysis
(see Problem 3.11), but instead of calculating the optimal tip height for ball travel distance, he did
so for the post-drag rolling speed. He neglected the drag (skid) distance, and he also assumed a
perfectly elastic cue tip. These assumptions can be modeled in this analysis with a tip efficiency of
100% and really sticky cloth (high sliding friction):
                                                η  1                μs  1000

 In Shepard's analysis, he maximized the ratio between the post-skid rolling velocity and the cue
 speed:
                                                                            
                                     v skid v v s x η mr ω v s x η mr                
                          VR( x ) 
                                                            vs
                                                  x                             x
                 x  Maximize( VR x )               0.235                        47.088 %
                                                 R                           x max

 This agrees with the result from Shepard's equations:

                                                        x     
                                                    1        
                                                                                                                                      
                                           10            R
                        VRShepard ( x )                                                    x  Maximize VRShepard x
                                           7 
                                                        5 x 
                                                              2
                                               1  mr                               x                              x
                                                       2 R                                 0.235                         47.088 %
                                                                                          R                          x max

                                                         7        2
                          x_RShepard  1                           mr  0.235
                                                         5        5

  Shepard's result differs from the distance-based result above (x/R = 0.235 vs. 0.174) because he
  neglected cue tip inefficiency and the drag distance of the ball.

  Now, assuming a perfect tip, and neglecting the skid phase, the distance analysis yields the
  same result as the rolling-speed analysis (i.e., the optimal tip height for rolling distance is the
  same as that for rolling speed).

                                         
                                                                                     x                           x
    f ( x )  d v s x η mr μs μr    x  Maximize( f x )                     0.235                          47.088 %
                                                                                     R                         x max

  Accounting for tip inefficiency and considering rolling only, the optimal tip height is:

                                                                              
                                                    v skid v v s x η mr ω v s x η mr     
          η  .87                     VR( x ) 
                                                                             vs

                                                                       x                           x
                    x  0       x  Maximize( VR x )                    0.186                           37.263 %
                                                                       R                       x max

  Again, this differs from the result above (x/R = 0.186 vs. 0.174), due to the effects of drag
  distance.
     And again, including the effects of both tip inefficiency and skid distance, the optimal tip height,
     under typical conditions, is about 17.5% of the ball radius or about 35% of the maximum tip offset:

                                                                   x  Maximize(f x)
                                                                                                 x                  x
μs  0.2         f ( x )  d v s x η mr μs μr                                             0.174              34.864 %
                                                                                                 R              x max

     Now let's look at the effects of different conditions, relative to typical values.

     With a lighter (10% less weight) cue, the optimal tip height is a little higher than normal:

                                           mr                                              x                  x
            f ( x )  d  v s x η          μs μr        x  Maximize( f x )        0.184                 36.708 %
                                           .90                                             R                 x max

     And with a heavier (10% more weight) cue, the optimal tip height is a little lower than normal:

                                           mr                                              x                  x
            f ( x )  d  v s x η           μs μr x  Maximize( f x )              0.166                 33.14  %
                                           1.10                                            R                 x max

     With slicker cloth (50% less sliding friction), the optimal tip height is a little lower than normal:

                                                               x  Maximize(f x)
                                                                                             x                  x
            f ( x )  d v s x η mr 0.5μs μr                                            0.162                 32.462 %
                                                                                             R                 x max

     And with stickier cloth (50% more sliding friction), the optimal tip height is a little higher than
     normal:

                                                              
                                                                           x                x
         f ( x )  d v s x η mr 1.5μs μr x  Maximize( f x )    0.178             35.665 %
                                                                           R             x max

     With faster cloth (50% less rolling resistance), the optimal tip height is a little higher than normal:

                                                               x  Maximize(f x)
                                                                                             x                  x
            f ( x )  d v s x η mr μs 0.5μr                                            0.18                  36.065 %
                                                                                             R                 x max

     And with slower cloth (50% more rolling resistance), the optimal tip height is a little lower than
     normal:

                                                              
                                                                           x            x
         f ( x )  d v s x η mr μs 1.5μr x  Maximize( f x )    0.168           33.662 %
                                                                           R         x max

     BOTTOM LINE: When trying to control the CB travel distance very accurately and
     consistently, the best tip height to use is about 16-19% of the ball's radius above the
     center. The exact amount varies some with equipment and conditions.
As a final observation, note how ball travel distance (including both drag and rolling) varies with
cue speed at the optimal tip offset:
                                       x  0.174  R                v s  0 0.01 mph  3  mph

                                 40

                                 30

   
  d vs x η mr μs μr    20
               ft

                                 10

                                  0
                                       0                1                     2                 3
                                                                  vs

                                                                 mph

As with just rolling, total travel distance vs. speed is a square relationship. As you double the cue
speed, the distance quadruples.

                                                      
                                                    d 2  mph x η mr μs μr  
                                                                                        4
                                                    d  1  mph x η mr μs μr
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_13_rolling_cue_ball_carom_angle_approximations.pdf
title: TP B.13 - Rolling CB Carom Angle Approximations
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                                technical proof
                                                              TP B.13
                             Rolling CB Carom Angle Approximations

                                                    supporting:
                                  “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                              http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                      by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                     originally posted: 9/17/2011                     last revision: 2/6/2021

Relevant physical constants and parameters
             e  0.95                                      typical coefficient of restitution between balls
                    2.25 in                  D
             D                       R                  ball dimensions, converter to meters
                         m                    2
                             3  mph
             v slow                                       typical slow CB speed, in meters/sec
                               m
                                  s
                         7  mph
             v fast                                       typical medium-fast CB speed, in meters/sec
                              m
                              s

             φ  0  deg 1  deg  90 deg              cut angle range
             f  0 0.01  1                             ball-hit fraction range

From TP A.23, cut angle () and ball-hit fraction (f) are related according to:
                             φf ( f )  asin( 1  f )                                 fφ( φ)  1  sin( φ)

From TP A.4, the ideal carom angle for a rolling CB, neglecting ball inelasticity and friction is:

                                                                           sin ( φ)  cos ( φ) 
                                                  θideal ( φ)  atan 
                                                                                2 2 
                                                                       sin ( φ)  
                                                                                 5 

A very crude approximation for CB carom angle, which works fairly well close to a 1/2-ball hit, is called
"back-of-the-ball" aiming, where you visualize the mirror image of the CB's ghost-ball position on the back
of the OB, as if the OB were striking the mirror image of the CB. This approximation predicts that the CB
carom angle is the same as the cut angle of the shot:

                                                                θback ( φ)  φ

Another crude approximation for CB carom angle, which works well for full hits, is called
"back-point-on-the-ball" aiming (sometimes also called "back-of-the-ball" aiming). The predicted CB
direction is parallel to a line through the center of the OB and the point on the back of the OB along the
aiming line:
                                                            θpoint ( φ)  asin ( 2 sin ( φ) )
   As suggested by Onoda (Am. J. Phys., v57, n5, May, 1989), because of the shape of the curves in the plots
   below, the CB carom angle can be approximated fairly well over certain ranges of shots. For thin hits (less
   than a 1/4-ball hit), the carom angle is about 70% of the angle to the tangent line, for thick hits (more than
   a 3/4-ball hit), the deflection angle is about 2.5x the cut angle, and for cuts over the wide range from a
   1/4-ball to a 3/4-ball hit, the deflection angle is fairly close to 30 degrees (i.e., the "natural angle"), which is
   the basis for the 30-degree rule. Equations for each of these cases are summarized below, and the
   approximation lines appear on the plots.

                                                                                          φthin  φf   φf    0.01 deg  90 deg
                                                                                                        1          1
                 θthin( φ)  0.7( 90 deg  φ)      fthin  0 0.01  0.25
                                                                                                        4         
                                                                                                                   4

                                                                                          φfull  0  deg 0.01 deg  φf  
                                                                                                                               3
                 θfull( φ)  2.5 φ                 ffull  0.75 0.76  1
                                                                                                                               4 
                                                                                          φnat  φf   φf    0.01 deg  φf  
                                                                                                          3      3                1
                 θnat( φ)  30 deg                 fnat  0.25 0.26  0.75
                                                                                                      4      4                    4     
                                                     fback  0.4 0.41  1                        φback  0  deg 0.01deg  φf ( 0.4)

                                                     fpoint  0.7 0.71  1                       φpoint  0  deg 0.01deg  φf ( 0.7)

                                         ideal CB carom angle vs. ball-hit fraction:

       
θideal φf ( f )   
      deg                       30

       
θthin φf fthin        
       deg

      
θfull φf ffull        
       deg                      20

       
θnat φf fnat

      deg

        
θback φf fback             
           deg                  10

        
θpoint φf fpoint           
           deg

                                 0
                                     0         0.2                     0.4                         0.6                    0.8
                                                                   f fthin ffull fnat fback fpoint
                                                 ideal CB carom angle vs. cut angle:

θideal( φ)

   deg                              30

        
θthin φthin             
    deg

     
θfull φfull         
    deg                             20

    
θnat φnat       
    deg

θback φback                
        deg                         10

            
θpoint φpoint                   
         deg

                                     0
                                         0            20                        40                          60   80

                                                               φ   φthin φfull φnat φback φpoint
                                                                                  
                                                               deg deg     deg deg    deg    deg

   The plots and approximations above apply only to the idealized case of perfectly elastic balls with
   absolutely no friction between them. The following analysis (and the end of TP A.6) takes into account
   both ball inelasticity and friction.

   From TP A.14, the relative sliding speed between the CB and OB, at impact, is:

                                             vrel     v sin    Rz 2  Rx cos 2
   For a rolling CB (x = -v/R) with no English (z=0), the relative sliding speed is the same as the CB speed
   for all cut angles:
                                                                   v rel  v
   Therefore, from TP A.14, for a rolling CB with no English, the coefficient of sliding friction between the balls
   will vary with CB speed (in units of m/s) according to:
                                                                         3
                                                 μ( v )  9.951  10          0.108  exp( 1.088  v )
  From TP A.6, the post-impact velocity components and final CB carom angle for a rolling CB,
  accounting for ball inelasticity and friction, are given by:

                                   ωx0( v ϕ)     μ( v )  ( 1  e)  cos( ϕ)  1
                                                 v 5                                3
                                                 R 4                                              

                                   ωy0( v ϕ)     μ( v )  ( 1  e)  sin( ϕ)  cos( ϕ) 
                                                 v 5                                          2
                                                 R 4                                                  
                                                     v
                                   v x0( v ϕ)         sin( ϕ)  cos( ϕ)  [ 1  e  μ( v )  ( 1  e)  cos( ϕ) ]
                                                     2
                                                     v 
                                                        sin( ϕ)  [ 2  μ( v )  ( 1  e)  cos( ϕ) ]  ( 1  e)  cos( ϕ) 
                                                                 2                                                          2
                                   v y0( v ϕ) 
                                                     2
                                                            5  vx0( v ϕ)  2 R ωy0( v ϕ) 
                                       θtyp( v ϕ)  atan                                     
                                                            5  vy0( v ϕ)  2 R ωx0( v ϕ) 

    The plots below shot how things are slightly different with typical ball elasticity and friction
    conditions. Notice how shot speed only has a slight effect on the results.

                                                  typical CB carom angle vs. ball-hit fraction:

                                 40

         
θideal φf ( f )    
      deg

     
θtyp vslow φf ( f )            30
             deg

     
θtyp vfast φf ( f )       
             deg

       
θthin φf fthin                 20

         deg

       
θfull φf ffull         
         deg
                                 10
       
θnat φf fnat

         deg

                                  0
                                       0                      0.2                    0.4                          0.6             0.8
                                                                                      f f f fthin ffull fnat
                                                    typical CB carom angle vs. cut angle:

                               40

θideal( φ)

   deg

    
θtyp vslow φ              30
         deg

    
θtyp vslow φ             
         deg

        
θthin φthin                   20

    deg

     
θfull φfull        
    deg
                               10
    
θnat φnat      
    deg

                                0
                                    0                 20                            40                         60   80

                                                                     φ        φ  φthin φfull φnat
                                                                                       φ
                                                                                     
                                                                                            
                                                                     deg deg deg deg     deg deg

            Bottom Line:

            With a rolling CB shot, the CB carom angle will be:

               - about 30 degrees for an average cut shot (between a 1/4-ball to a 3/4-ball hit)

               - about 70% of the angle to the tangent line for a thin hit (less than a 1/4-ball hit)

               - about 2.5-times the cut angle for a thick hit (more than a 3/4-ball hit)

            Also, here are exact CB carom angle values for important ball-hit references:

                                                            
                                        θtyp v slow φf ( 0.5)  33.4 deg                     1/2-ball hit

                                                                
                                        θtyp v slow φf ( 0.25)  27 deg                      1/4-ball hit

                                                                
                                        θtyp v slow φf ( 0.75)  27.5 deg                    3/4-ball hit
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_14_draw_shot_cue_ball_angle_approximations.pdf
title: TP B.14 - Draw shot cue ball angle approximations
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                                      technical proof
                                                  TP B.14
                                   Draw shot cue ball angle approximations
                                                      supporting:
                                    “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                                   http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                     by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                originally posted: 9/24/2011               last revision: 9/24/2011

 Relevant physical constants and parameters
              e  0.95                                 typical coefficient of restitution between balls

                     2.25 in             D
              D                  R                  ball dimensions, converter to meters
                        m                 2

                     5  mph
              v                                       typical slow-medium CB speed
                       m
                        s

              φ  0  deg 1  deg  90 deg         cut angle range

              f  0 0.01  1                        ball-hit fraction range

From TP A.23, cut angle () and ball-hit fraction (f) are related according to:
                                    φf ( f )  asin( 1  f )                                 fφ( φ)  1  sin( φ)

From TP A.4, the final cue ball deflection angle for any shot is:

                                                                 5v sin( ) cos( ) 
                                                   c  tan 1                     
                                                                 5v sin ( )  2 R 
                                                                        2

From TP A.20, the amount of backspin for a typical good action draw shot is:
                                                                                v
                                                                ω = 0.625 
                                                                               R
giving a CB deflection angle of:

                                                                     sin( ) cos( ) 
                                                    c  tan 1                        
                                                                     sin 2
                                                                            ( )  1 / 4  

 Therefore, the angle between the orignal CB aiming and the draw line is:

                                   θactual( φ)  180  deg  atan2 sin( φ)  sin( φ)  cos( φ) 
                                                                             2 1
                                                                              4                     
From TP A.20, here are two approximations that apply to certain ranges of draw shots:

                              Double-bisect system (double the cut angle and double the total angle again)
                                         θfull( φ)  4  φ

                              Trisect system (triple the cut angle):
                                         θtri ( φ)  3  φ

                                                                              .5

                     
        θactual φf ( f )           300
                    deg

                
        θfull φf ( f )        
                                    200
                deg

            
        θtri φf ( f )     
            deg                     100                                                                 90

                                        0
                                            0            0.2        0.4             0.6    0.8               1
                                                                                f

                                                               30

          θactual( φ)
                                  300
                deg

          θfull( φ)
                                  200
             deg

          θtri( φ)

            deg                   100                                                                 90

                                    0
                                        0               20          40                60         80
                                                                          φ
                                                                          deg
 The double-bisect system approximates the draw angle very well up to about a 20 degree cut (~5/8-ball hit):
             φfull  0  deg 1  deg  20 deg              ffull  fφ( 20 deg) fφ( 20 deg)  .01  1

                                                                  5
                                       fφ( 20 deg)  0.658            0.625
                                                                  8

 The trisect system approximates the draw angle fairly well for all shots in the 0-40 degree cut range (i.e,
 greater than ~3/8-ball hit):

             φtri  0  deg 1  deg  40 deg               ftri  fφ( 40 deg) fφ( 40 deg)  .01  1

                                                                      3
                                         fφ( 40 deg)  0.357              0.375
                                                                      8

The slope of the draw-angle curve can be used to develop additional approximations:
                                                                                                               2
            slope ( φφ) 
                             d    180  deg  atan sin( φφ)  cos( φφ)   simplify  8  sin( φφ)  4
                             dφφ
                                                               2    1                           2
                                                   sin( φφ)                        8  sin( φφ)  1
                                                                    4 

At the important 1/2-ball hit (30 degree cut) benchmark, the slope is:
                                                        slope ( 30 deg)  2

so a good approximation for an average cut angle (close to 30 degrees) is:
                                                     θavg( φ)  2  φ  30 deg

This approximation applies fairly well for cut angles in the 10-60 degree (~1/8-7/8 ball-hit fraction) range:

             φavg  10 deg 11 deg  60 deg               favg  fφ( 60 deg) fφ( 60 deg)  .01  fφ( 10 deg)

                                             7                                                  1
                fφ( 10 deg)  0.826              0.875           fφ( 60 deg)  0.134              0.125
                                             8                                                  8

For a 90-degree cut, the slope of the draw-angle curve is:

                                                      slope ( 90 deg)  1.333

so a good approximation for a thin cut (close to 90 degrees) is:
                                                             4
                                                 θthin( φ)   φ  60 deg
                                                             3

This approximation applies fairly well for cut angles in the 40-90 degree range (i.e., thinner than ~3/8-ball hit):

                        φthin  40 deg 41 deg  90 deg               fthin  0 .01  fφ( 40 deg)

                                                                           3
                                              fφ( 40 deg)  0.357              0.375
                                                                           8
            Here's a composite all all of the approximations over their good ranges:

                                                                               .5

        
θactual φf ( f )   
      deg
                        150
      
θfull φf ffull     
       deg

      
θtri φf ftri

     deg                100

                 
                                                                                                                    90
θavg φf favg

       deg

       
θthin φf fthin       50
       deg

                          0
                              0         0.2                  0.4                            0.6         0.8              1
                                                                 f ffull ftri favg fthin

                                                   30

   θactual( φ)

        deg
                        150
            
   θfull φfull     
        deg

         
   θtri φtri

       deg              100

                  
                                                                                                                   90
   θavg φavg

        deg

            
   θthin φthin          50
         deg

                          0
                              0          20                         40                             60         80

                                                        φφfull φtri φavg φthin
                                                                  
                                                     deg deg deg deg       deg
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_15_pocket_geometry_calculations.pdf
title: TP B.15 - Pocket geometry calculations
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
technical proof                                                                                                                    technical proof
                                                         TP B.15
                                               Pocket geometry calculations
                                                            supporting:
                                          “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                                    http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                           by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                    originally posted: 7/12/2013           last revision: 7/12/2013

                                                                                                      r
                                                      pocket
                    2” (5.1cm)                        throat
                                                       size                                                                   t
                                                                                             c
                                                                                                                    135º
                                                                                                                    
                  take measurements
                                                                                                             m
                   at the intersections                         pocket
                      of the cushion                             shelf
                    nose, facing, and                           depth
                        edge lines         pocket                                                         (mt)/2
                                           mouth
                                            size

The pocket facing angle is usually specified as angle .
The wedge angle of the cushion is given by:
                                                           β = 180 deg  α
                                                                                                                                                     ( 1)
The angle of the facing relative to the pocket centerline is:
                                                           θ = α  135 deg
                                                                                                                                                     ( 2)
These angles are also related by:
                                                           β = 45 deg  θ
                                                                                                                                                     ( 3)
From the triangle formed by angle , the length of the pocket facing is:
                                                                       c
                                                                r=
                                                                     sin( β)                                                                         ( 4)
and the mouth-throat difference is related to this length according to:
                                                            ( m  t)
                                                                       = r sin( θ)
                                                                2                                                                                    ( 5)
Substituting Equation 4 into Equation 5, gives:
                                            ( m  t)
                                                                 sin( β) = sin( θ)
                                                         2 c                                                                                        ( 6)

But from Equation 3 and the angle-difference trig identity,
                                                                                                 1
             sin( β) = sin( 45 deg  θ) = sin( 45 deg) cos( θ)  cos( 45 deg) sin( θ) =            ( cos( θ)  sin( θ) )                         ( 7)
                                                                                                 2
Using Equation 7 in Equation 6 gives:
                                         ( m  t)
                                                     ( cos( θ)  sin( θ) ) = sin( θ)                           ( 8)
                                         2 2 c

Rearranging gives:
                                                        sin( θ)                 1
                                          tan( θ) =               =                                             ( 9)
                                                        cos( θ)       1  2  2  c 
                                                                                    
                                                                       ( m  t) 
Therefore, from Equation 2 and 9, the facing angle can be found from the mouth-throat difference with:

                                          α = 135  deg  atan                        
                                                                                    1
                                                                                        
                                                                       1 
                                                                              2 2 c                          ( 10)
                                                                                      
                                                                        ( m  t) 

Here is an example of using Equation 10 to calculate the pocketing facing angle from pocket measurements:

                m  4.5 in      t  3.75 in                   m  t  0.75 in           c  2  in

                               α  135  deg  atan                     
                                                                      1
                                                                           
                                                          1 
                                                                 2 2 c 
                                                                         
                                                           ( m  t)  

For a given pocket facing angle, the mouth-throat difference (mt) can be found using Equations 1, 2, 4 and 5:

                                         α  142  deg                   c  2  in

                                                    c
                               mt  2                             sin( α  135  deg)
                                         sin( 180  deg  α)
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_16_cb_ob_distance_for_follow_cling.pdf
title: TP_B-16
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
TP B.16
                                       CB-OB distance for follow cling
                                               supporting:
                            “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                            http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                 by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                            originally posted: 8/20/2014         last revision: 8/20/2014

                 ball radius:                    R ≔ 1.125 ⋅              half of 2 1/4" diameter
                 normal roll tip height:         x ≔ 0.4 ⋅ R              from TP 4.2

      Angle to tip contact point from vertical:
                            ⎛x⎞
                   α ≔ acos ⎜―⎟ = 66.422
                            ⎝R⎠

      Distance CB travels (based on nunber of full revolutions "n") to have the tip contact point
      arrive at the OB contact point and create cling:

                     d (n) ≔ R ⋅ ((α + 90°) + n ⋅ 360°)               n≔0‥2

      Number of "balls" between CB and OB to create cling condition:
                       b (n) ≔ d (n) ÷ (2 ⋅ R)

      Results:
                                  ⎡0⎤                     ⎡ 3.1 ⎤                    ⎡ 1.4 ⎤
                                n=⎢1⎥            d (n) = ⎢ 10.1 ⎥            b (n) = ⎢ 4.5 ⎥
                                  ⎢⎣ 2 ⎥⎦                ⎢⎣ 17.2 ⎥⎦                  ⎢⎣ 7.6 ⎥⎦

So when the CB is about 1.4 balls or 4.5 balls from the OB, don't expect typical follow action.

                                              Non-Commercial Use Only
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_17_maximum_drag_enhanced_sidespin_tip_contact_point.pdf
title: TP_B-17
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
TP B.17
          Maximum Drag-Enhanced Sidespin Tip Contact Point
                                       supporting:
                    “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                http://billiards.colostate.edu
                      by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                  originally posted: 11/6/2015   last revision: 11/9/2019

From TP A.12, right sidespin imparted to the CB, based on CB speed (v) is:
                                            5⋅x⋅v
                                       ωy ＝ ―――
                                            2 ⋅ R2

and backspin imparted to the CB is:
                                          -5 ⋅ y ⋅ v
                                     ωx ＝ ―――
                                           2 ⋅ R2

From TP A.1, the final CB speed after the CB stops sliding (due to drag) and achieves
natural foward roll is:

                 5      2           5      2      ⎛ -5 ⋅ y ⋅ v ⎞ 5       ⎛    y⎞
            v' ＝ ―⋅ v - ―⋅ R ⋅ ωx ＝ ―⋅ v - ―⋅ R ⋅ ⎜―――     2 ⎟
                                                                ＝ ―⋅ v ⋅ ⎜1 + ―⎟
                 7      7           7      7      ⎝ 2⋅R ⎠ 7              ⎝    R⎠

To get the largest effective sidespin, the spin-to-speed ratio after drag should be as high as
possible. The final spin-speed ratio (AKA spin-rate-factor or SRF) is:

                                       5⋅x⋅v
                                       ―――
                            ωy          2 ⋅ R2            7⋅x
                     SRF ＝ ――     ＝ ―――――          ＝ ――――
                           ⎛ v' ⎞   5      ⎛    y⎞   2 ⋅ ((R + y))
                           ⎜―⎟      ―⋅ v ⋅ ⎜1 + ―⎟
                           ⎝R⎠      7      ⎝    R⎠
                                    ―――――
                                           R
      For the maximum possible spin, the tip contact point must be at the miscue limit, which
      is a half-ball radius from center. In other words, the tip contact point must be on the
      miscue-limit circle given by the following equation:
                                                          ⎛ R ⎞2
                                              x 2 + y 2 ＝ ⎜―⎟
                                                          ⎝2⎠

      Finding the maximum of the spin-speed ratio is equivalent to finding the maximum of the
      square of the spin-speed ratio (Z):
                                                                  ⎛⎛ R ⎞ 2         ⎞
                                                                  ⎜⎜―⎟ - y ⎟
                                                                                 2
                                                              7 ⋅
                                                 7⋅x 2
                                                                  ⎝⎝ 2 ⎠           ⎠
                                    SRF 2 ＝ ――――          2
                                                            ＝ ―――――            2
                                            2 ⋅ ((R + y))        2 ⋅ ((R + y))

      The maximum occurs where the derivative of SRF 2 is 0:

                                  ⎛        ⎛⎛ R ⎞ 2         ⎞    ⎞
                                           ⎜⎜―⎟ - y ⎟
                                                          2
                                  ⎜    7 ⋅                       ⎟ solve , y
                                  ⎜ d      ⎝⎝ 2 ⎠           ⎠                R
                               y ≔ ――  ―――――                  ＝ 0⎟ ―――    → -―
                                  ⎜ dy                  2        ⎟           4
                                  ⎝       2 ⋅ ((R + y))          ⎠

      The value of x corresponding to this is:

                                       ‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
                                       ⎛ R ⎞2       simplify  3 ⋅ ‾‾‾
                                                              ‾‾   R2
                                 x≔     ―
                                       ⎜ ⎟    - y 2
                                                    ―――    → ――――
                                       ⎝2⎠                       4
      So the angle below the horizontal to the tip contact point is:
                                        ⎛y⎞        ⎛ 1 ⎞
                                    tan ⎜―⎟ ＝ tan ⎜――   ⎟ ＝ 30 °
                                        ⎝x⎠           ‾‾
                                                  ⎜⎝ 3 ⎟⎠

      Therefore, the required tip contact point for maximum sidespin effect is at "4
      o'clock" for right spin and "8 o'clock" for left spin.

      Per Ron Shepard's "Amateur Physics for the Amateur Pool Player" (Problem 3.7), it can be
      shown that this point (x, y) lies on a "base circle" through the resting point and center of
      the CB:
                                                      2
                                            ⎛    R⎞   R2
                                        x + ⎜y + ―⎟ → ――
                                          2

                                            ⎝    2⎠   4

Per the illustration above, the intersection of the miscue-limit and base circles provides
and easy way to visualize the required tip contact point for maximum drag-enhanced-spin.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_18_pendulum_stroke_cue_tip_trajectory.pdf
title: TP_B-18
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
TP B.18
                            Pendulum Stroke Cue Tip Trajectory
                                             supporting:
                          “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                         http://billiards.colostate.edu
                             by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                       originally posted: 11/14/2015          last revision: 2/27/2019

                                        Dr. Dave's shooting dimensions:
                                                  forearm length:             l ≔ 14 ⋅
     length of cue between grip and bridge at set position:                   c ≔ 45 ⋅
                                                    bridge length:            b ≔ 12 ⋅

From the geometry in the diagram above:
                                          d ⋅ cos ((ϕ)) ＝ c - l ⋅ sin ((θ))                     ((1))

                                          d ⋅ sin ((ϕ)) ＝ l - l ⋅ cos ((θ))                     ((2))

Adding the squares of these two equations gives the distance (d) between grip and bridge during the
stroke:

                        d ((θ)) ≔ ‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
                                  c 2 + 2 ⋅ l 2 - 2 ⋅ c ⋅ l ⋅ sin ((θ)) - 2 ⋅ l 2 ⋅ cos ((θ))
Dividing Equation 2 by Equation 1 gives the cue elevation angle () during the stroke:
                                                                       ⎛ l ⋅ ((1 - cos ((θ)))) ⎞
                                                        ϕ ((θ)) ≔ atan ⎜―――――                  ⎟
                                                                       ⎝ c - l ⋅ sin ((θ)) ⎠

The coordinates of the tip (x, y) during the stroke are given by:

                                                   x ((θ)) ≔ ((c + b - d ((θ)))) ⋅ cos ((ϕ ((θ))))

                                                        y ((θ)) ≔ -((c + b - d ((θ)))) ⋅ sin ((ϕ ((θ))))

The minimum forearm angle ( θmin ) possible at the end of the backstroke, with the tip at the
bridge (x=0) is:
                                              θ ≔ -45 ⋅
                                                 θmin ≔             ((x ((θ)) , θ)) = -56.369

Assuming the forward stroke is the same length as the backstroke results in the same angle forward:
                                                                θmax ≔ -θmin

                                                        θ ≔ -80 ⋅          , -79 ⋅          ‥ 80 ⋅

Cue ball geometry (added to the tip trajectory plots below for scale):
                                                                                                          2.25
                                     t≔0⋅        ,1 ⋅        ‥ 360 ⋅                                  R ≔ ――   ⋅
                                                                                                            2
                                      xCB ((t)) ≔ ((b + R)) + R ⋅ cos ((t))                 yCB ((t)) ≔ R ⋅ sin ((t))

 Plot of the cue tip trajectory during the entire stroke:
                                                        θ ≔ θmin , θmin + 1 ⋅              ‥ θmax

   y ((θ)) ((     ))

   yCB ((t)) ((        ))

                             3

                             2

                             1

                             0
                                 0         2.5          5          7.5         10          12.5       15          17.5   20   22.5   25
                            -1

                            -2

                            -3

                                                                         x ((θ)) ((   ))      xCB ((t)) ((   ))
   Close-up of the cue tip trajectory close to the CB contact point:

  y ((θ)) ((     ))

  yCB ((t)) ((        ))

                            1.5

                             1

                            0.5

                             0
                                  10                11                 12                 13                  14            15

                           -0.5

                            -1

                           -1.5

                                                                x ((θ)) ((   ))   xCB ((t)) ((   ))

Total tip height variance (y) over a given distance (x) around the tip contact point:
                                                      Δx                                        Δx
                 Δx ≔ 4 ⋅                xstart ≔ b - ―― = 10                        xend ≔ b + ―― = 14
                                                       2                                         2

                 θ≔0              θstart ≔       ⎛⎝x ((θ)) - xstart , θ⎞⎠ = -8.212                    x ⎛⎝θstart⎞⎠ = 10

                 θ≔0              θend ≔ -θstart                                                      x ⎛⎝θend⎞⎠ = 13.999

                 Δy ≔ y ⎛⎝θstart⎞⎠ - y ⎛⎝θend⎞⎠ = 0.016                      Δy = 0.411

         Obviously, from the plots and numbers above, a pure pendulum stroke results
         in the tip moving very straight into and through the CB position, with an
         accurate tip contact point.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_19_comparison_of_cue_ball_deflection_squirt_endmass_and_stiffness_effects.pdf
title: TP_B-19
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
TP B.19
                           Comparison of cue ball deflection (squirt)
                              "endmass" and stiffness effects
                                               supporting:
                            “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                       http://billiards.colostate.edu
                              by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                          originally posted: 1/23/2016    last revision: 1/30/2016

From an actual tip-deflection measurement due to a weight applied to the end of a Predator Z-2 shaft:
                                           Fapplied ≔ 3.1
                                           Δxmeasured ≔ 1.4 ⋅

Therefore, the transverse stiffness of the shaft is:
                                                Fapplied
                                      kshaft ≔ ――――       = 2.214 ――
                                               Δxmeasured

For a medium-fast shot, the impulse pushing the CB forward with momentum             is about:
                                      m≔6⋅               v≔5⋅
                                      Fimp ≔ m ⋅ v = 0.085       ⋅

Over a typical cue-tip contact time, the peak forward force generated, assuming a triangular impulse
curve, is:
                                       Δt ≔ 1 ⋅   = 0.001

                                             2
                                      Ffwd ≔ ―― ⋅ Fimp = 170.945
                                             Δt

For a near-maximum sidespin shot, the peak angular speed as the tip releases from the ball is about:

                                                      v
                              R ≔ 2.25 ⋅          ω ≔ ―= 373.484
                                                      R

The amount the CB rotates during tip contact, using an average CB speed and spin during contact is
about:
                                           ω
                                     Δθ ≔ ―⋅ Δt = 1.12
                                           2

Therefore, for a near-maximum spin shot (where the tip contact point is about 30 degrees from the
center), the amount the tip moves sideways during tip contact is about:

                                     Δx ≔ R ⋅ Δθ ⋅ cos (30 ) = 0.038

                                           Non-Commercial Use Only
This corresponds to a peak sideways force, due to stiffness k, of about:
                                      Fk ≔ kshaft ⋅ Δx = 0.084

From my September '07 article, for a typical shot with sidespin, the squirt angle for the Z-2 is about:
                                              α ≔ 1.8

Therefore, the total peak sideways force delivered to the CB (which acts equal and opposite on the tip)
is about:
                                Fside ≔ tan (α) ⋅ Ffwd = 5.372

The force resulting from transverse stiffness is a small fraction of this total sideways force:
                                          Fk
                                         ――    = 1.571%
                                         Fside

Since only a portion of the shaft flexes (5-8 inches) during tip contact, I took another set of staic
stiffness measurements, with only 8 inches of the end of the shaft allowed to flex. Here is how this
changes the results:
                                                                    Fapplied
                      Δxmeasured ≔ 0.156 ⋅                kshaft ≔ ――――        = 19.872 ――
                                                                   Δxmeasured
                                                          Fk
                      Fk ≔ kshaft ⋅ Δx = 0.757           ――    = 14.095%
                                                         Fside

Therefore, as has been shown with experiments dealing with adding and removing mass from the end
of the shaft, endmass is much more important than shaft flex concerning how much CB
deflection (squirt) a shaft creates (although, as pointed out on the following resource page, lateral
or transverse stiffness does affect "effective endmass").

               For more information, see:
                http://billiards.colostate.edu/threads/squirt.html#endmass

 Acknowledgment: I want to thank Jim Valasina on AZB for helping me to think through some of
 the assumptions and implications involved with this analysis.

                                          Non-Commercial Use Only
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_1_squirt_angle_pivot_length_and_tip_size.pdf
title: TP B.1 - Squirt angle, pivot length, and tip shape
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
technical proof                                                                                      technical proof
                                           TP B.1
                          Squirt angle, pivot length, and tip shape
                                              supporting:
                            “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                         http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                      originally posted: 11/1/2007       last revision: 11/8/2007

                     original                         cue
                     aiming                          pivot                                        contact point
                       line                          angle                                          offset (b)
                                                      (α)           ball
                                                                   radius
                                                                     (R)

  cue
 pivot
length                                                                                                        tip
  (p)                                                                                                       radius
                                                                                                              (r)
                       bridge
                        pivot
                        point

                                         a                                ball radius and mass:
                                 b
                                                                                       2.25⋅ in
                                 β                                           R :=                       mb := 6 ⋅ oz
                      R     R                                                             2

                                                                          tip radii:
                                     r                                                        0.705 ⋅ in
                                                                               rdime :=
                                                                                                  2

                      p                                                                        0.835 ⋅ in
                           α                                                   rnickel :=
                                                                                                    2

                                                                               rbreak := 0.5⋅ in
From the drawings above,

                                               cos( β) =                
                                                                     a
                   b = Rcos( β)                                                     a = ( p + R) ⋅ sin( α)   ( 1)
                                                              R + r

so the contact point tip offset distance "b" is related to the cue pivot angle ( α), bridge length
(p), and tip radius (r) according to:

                                                        R
                                  b ( α , p , r) :=          ⋅ ( p + R) ⋅ sin( α)                            ( 2)
                                                      R+r

This equation can be rearranged to solve for the natural pivot length for the cue for a given
squirt angle (α), tip offset (b), and tip radius (r):

                                                      ( R + r) ⋅ b
                                  p ( α , b , r) :=                      −R                                  ( 3)
                                                       R⋅ sin( α)

The assumption here is the cue pivot angle (α) exactly cancels the cue squirt angle (α),
resulting in a straight shot.

From TP A.31 (Equation 13), the squirt angle is a function of tip offset (b) and the endmass
properties of the cue:

                                               5 b                  2     
                                                     ⋅ ⋅ 1 −  
                                                                  b
                                                                          
                           α( b , mr) := atan     2 R           R                                        ( 4)
                                                                      2 
                                               1 + mr + 5 ⋅ 1 −  b   
                                                        2         R  

where mr is the endmass ratio for the cue defined by:

                                                           mb                                                ( 5)
                                                      mr =
                                                           me

where mb is the mass of the ball and m e is the effective endmass of the cue. The mass
ratio mr can be determined experimentally if a squirt value (αexp) is measured for a known
offset (bexp). From Equation 4,

                                          b             2                
                                              ⋅ 1 −  
                                                        b
                                      5 R            R  − 1 −  b   − 1
                                                                        2
                                                                                                             ( 6)
                         mr( b , α) := ⋅                                  
                                      2        tan( α)         R  
Now let's look at example data and plots for some real cues. From my September '07 BD
article, here is some data for several example cues:

               Players ("regular" cue):

                                b exp := 0.51⋅ in          αexp := 2.5⋅ deg

                                               (
                                mrexp := mr b exp , αexp      )               mrexp = 20.151

                                           (
                                p exp := p αexp , b exp , rdime   )           p exp = 14.231 in

               Predator Z ("low-squirt" cue):

                                b exp := 0.51⋅ in          αexp := 1.8⋅ deg

                                     (             )
                                mr b exp , αexp = 29.158

                                 (                     )
                                p αexp , b exp , rdime = 20.199 in

               Stinger (break/jump cue):

                                b exp := 0.3⋅ in           αexp := 2.4⋅ deg

                                     (             )
                                mr b exp , αexp = 12.008

                                 (                     )
                                p αexp , b exp , rbreak = 9.223 in

So, as expected, the natural pivot length (p) for a "low-squirt" cue is longer than for a
"regular" cue, and the pivot length for a break cue is much shorter. These calculated
numbers are consistent with experimentally-determined pivot lengths (see my November '07
article for more information). Note that the range of endmass ratios reported here (12 to 21)
is much smaller and lower than the expected range reported in Ron Shepard's 2001
"Everything you always wanted to know about cue ball squirt, but were afraid to ask" paper
(20 to 100) Also, the pivot lengths are much longer than the values reported by Platinum
Billiards (www.platinumbilliards.com/rating_deflect.php).

The Players cue numbers (mr exp and pexp) are used in the subsequent analysis as an
example.
So for a fixed bridge length, how does tip offset vary with the cue pivot angle:

                                           αp := 0 ⋅ deg , 0.1⋅ deg .. 3 ⋅ deg

                                           0.6

                                           0.4
                 (
               b αp , pexp , rdime     )
                          R
                                           0.2

                                            0
                                                 0           1             2         3
                                                                   αp
                                                                   deg

 As you can see, the offset varies nearly linearly over typical cue pivot angles.

 So how does a cue's squirt angle vary with tip offset:

                                                 bx := 0 ⋅ in , 0.01⋅ in .. 0.5⋅ R

                                   3

                                   2
                     (
                 α bx , mrexp  )
                         deg
                                   1

                                   0
                                       0     0.1      0.2        0.3     0.4
                                                            bx
                                                            R

  As you can see, the squirt also varies nearly linearly over the range of
  possible tip offsets. This is why the BHE and FHE aim compensation methods are
  effective (see my November '07 article).
For the cue pivot angle to exactly cancel the squirt angle, the pivot length needs to be
a certain value. Does this value change with tip offset and the size of the tip:

                                              bx := 0.01⋅ in , 0.02⋅ in .. 0.5⋅ R

                                    16

   ( (              )
  p α bx , mrexp , bx , rdime) 14
               in

   ( (              )
  p α bx , mrexp , bx , rnickel )
                in
                                    12

                                    10
                                         0          0.1        0.2           0.3    0.4
                                                                      bx
                                                                       R

 The answer is yes ... the required pivot length does vary a little with both tip
 offset and tip radius. So when comparing different cues with experimental
 measurements, it is important to use the same tip shape and the same amount of
 tip offset (English) for each cue.

               For 50% English,

                                    bx := 0.25⋅ R

                                   ((              )
                                p α bx , mrexp , bx , rnickel     )
                                                                    − 1 = 4.774 %
                                  p ( α( bx , mrexp) , bx , rdime)

               So a cue with a tip of nickel radius has a natural pivot length about 5%
               longer than the same cue with a tip of dime radius.
Now, what is the effect of tip size on the accuracy of a near center-ball hit? This is
an extension of the analysis in TP A.10. We will compare two different bridge
lengths:
                 p short := 6 ⋅ in                    p long := 18⋅ in

Let's assume a near cent-ball hit, where the shooter has a cue pivot-angle error of up
to 1/2 a degree:
                                             ∆α := 0.5⋅ deg

If the bridge distance happens to match the natural pivot length for the cue, the cue
pivot angle will cancel the squirt angle, and the cue ball will still head in the
aiming-line direction. However, the cue pivot angle will create tip offset and English.
Here's how the percent English changes with pivot angle error for various
combinations of bridge lengths and tip shapes:

               (
             b ∆α , p short , rdime)                          (
                                                          b ∆α , p long , rdime)
                                            = 8.416 %                                   = 22.592 %
                      0.5R                                        0.5R

               (
             b ∆α , p short , rnickel   )                     (
                                                          b ∆α , p long , rnickel   )
                                            = 8.062 %                                   = 21.64 %
                      0.5R                                         0.5R

               (
             b ∆α , p short , rbreak   )                      (
                                                          b ∆α , p long , rbreak   )
                                            = 7.653 %                                   = 20.541 %
                      0.5R                                         0.5R

 So a shorter bridge is dramatically better if you want to minimize English
 effects with a non-perfect center-ball hit. A flatter tip also reduces the
 impact of error with a center-ball hit. However, a shorter bridge can cause
 stroke problems (e.g., not enough length for smooth acceleration) and it fails to
 take advantage of the squirt-canceling natural-pivot-length effect of the cue (see my
 November '07 article). And a flatter tip is not suitable for applying English on
 non-center-ball hits. See my January '08 article for more information.
So what affect does ball mass have on the natural pivot length for a cue and cue ball
combination?

        Here is the data for the Players cue with a regulation-weight cue ball:

                        b exp := 0.51⋅ in          αexp := 2.5⋅ deg

                                           (
                        mrexp := mr b exp , αexp         )            mrexp = 20.151

                                   (
                        p exp := p αexp , b exp , rdime          )    p exp = 14.231 in

        For a 10% heavier cue ball, the mass ratio (mb/me) would be slightly
        larger, creating a smaller squirt angle and a longer pivot length:

                      mrheavy := 1.1⋅ mrexp

                                       (
                      αheavy := α b exp , mrheavy            )        αheavy = 2.3 deg

                        (                          )
                      p αheavy , b exp , rdime = 15.565 in

                        (
                       p αheavy , b exp , rdime    )                          9% longer pivot
                                                        − 1 = 9.381 %
                                 p exp                                        length

        For a 10% lighter cue ball, the mass ratio (mb/me) would be slightly
        smaller, creating a larger squirt angle and a shorter pivot length:

                      mrlight := 0.9⋅ mrexp

                                   (
                      αlight := α b exp , mrlight       )             αlight = 2.738 deg

                        (                      )
                      p αlight , b exp , rdime = 12.896 in

                        (
                       p αlight , b exp , rdime)                              9% shorter pivot
                                                       − 1 = −9.379 %
                                p exp                                         length
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_20_peak_forces_and_tip_contact_distance_during_a_break_shot.pdf
title: TP_B-20
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
TP B.20
    Peak forces and tip contact distance during a break shot
                                  supporting:
               “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                           http://billiards.colostate.edu
                   by Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

               originally posted: 7/24/2016     last revision: 5/19/2018

mb ≔ 6 ⋅                   ball mass

ms ≔ 19 ⋅                  typical cue mass
        3
mrack ≔ ―⋅ mb              effective mass of a rack of balls
        2                   from: http://billiards.colostate.edu/high_speed_videos/new/HSVB-45.htm

vb ≔ 30 ⋅                  ball speed after impact (for a ver-fast-speed break shot)

Δttip ≔ 0.0008 ⋅           typical tip-ball contact time (with a hard tip at fast speed)
                             from: http://billiards.colostate.edu/threads/cue_tip.html#contact
Δtball ≔ 0.00025 ⋅         typical ball-ball contact time
                             from: http://billiards.colostate.edu/threads/balls.html#contact

The average CB speed during tip contact is:
                                     vb
                            vb_avg ≔ ―= 15
                                     2

Therefore, the distance the CB (and tip) travels while the tip is in contact is:

                Δx ≔ vb_avg ⋅ Δttip = 0.211              Δx = 5.364

The momentum of the CB is created by the impulse between the tip and CB.
Assuming a triangular and symmetric impulse-force profile (at peak force Fpeak ):

                            1
                            ―⋅ Fpeak ⋅ Δttip ＝ mb ⋅ vb
                            2

So the peak force between the tip and CB is:
                                    2 ⋅ mb ⋅ vb
                            Fpeak ≔ ―――= 1282
                                       Δttip

This corresponds to a peak acceleration (in units of g):
                                    Fpeak
                            apeak ≔ ――= 3419
                                     mb
When the CB hits the rack of balls and bounces back (with speed vb' ), both momentum and
energy are conserved (assuming a perfect collision):

                         mb ⋅ vb ＝ mrack ⋅ vrack - mb ⋅ vb'

                 1         2  1          2  1                2
                 ―⋅ mb ⋅ vb ＝ ―⋅ mb ⋅ vb' + ―⋅ mrack ⋅ vrack
                 2            2             2

 Re-writing and solving these equations for vb' gives:

                                          3
                                     vb ＝ ―⋅ vrack - vb'
                                          2
                                                 3
                                  vb 2 ＝ vb' 2 + ―⋅ vrack 2
                                                 2

                   ⎛ 2                        2 ⎞ solve , vb' ⎡
                            2  2                                 6 ⋅ mph ⎤
                   ⎜vb ＝ vb' + ―⋅ ⎛⎝vb + vb'⎞⎠ ⎟ ―――       →⎢
                   ⎝           3                ⎠             ⎣ -30 ⋅ mph ⎥⎦

                                     vb' ≔ 5 ⋅

 The impulse between the CB and the rack is equal to the change in momentum of the CB:

                           1
                           ―⋅ Fpeak ⋅ Δtball ＝ mb ⋅ ⎛⎝vb + vb'⎞⎠
                           2

 So the peak force between the CB and rack is:
                                      2 ⋅ mb ⋅ ⎛⎝vb + vb'⎞⎠
                              Fpeak ≔ ―――――= 4786
                                           Δtball

 This corresponds to a peak acceleration (in units of g) of:
                                      Fpeak
                              apeak ≔ ――= 12764
                                       mb
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_21_small_gap_combination_throw_effects.pdf
title: TP B.21 - Small Gap Combination Throw Effects
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
TP B.21
technical proof                                                                                                     technical proof
                              Small-gap-combination throw effects
                                                supporting:
                              “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                            http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                  by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                             originally posted: 1/4/2018               last revision: 1/12/2018

                                                                                                        

                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                        
                  v                                   d

 The first OB is hit with speed v at angle  (relative to the original line of centers of the OBs) resulting in
 cut angle , and impact line-of-centers angle γ. Cut-induced throw (CIT)  results in the second OB
 heading at angle  relative to the original line of centers.

 The law of sines applied to the gray triangle in the diagram above, with ball radius R, gives:
                                                    9
                                              R   in  1.125  in
                                                    8
                            sin( α)       sin( 180  deg  α  γ)          sin( α  γ)        sin( ϕ)
                                      =                                =                  =
                             2R                  2R  d                     2R  d            2R  d

 This can be solved for the line-of-centers angle γ giving:

                                                              2R  d
                                      γ( α d )  asin              sin( α)   α
                                                              2R              
 The cut angle for the shot is:
                                                  ϕ( α d )  α  γ( α d )

 From TP A.23, the ball-hit fraction corresponding to this cut angle is:

                                                f ( α d )  1  sin( ϕ( α d ) )
The 1st-ball angle α is related to shot cut angle ϕ as:
                                                                          2R sin( ϕ) 
                                                   α( ϕ d )  asin         
                                                                        2R  d 
For a given gap distance d, the largest the 1st-ball angle (α max) can be, where the cut angle ϕ is 90
degrees, is:
                                                   αmax( d )  asin
                                                                        2R 
                                                                              
                                                                          
                                                                       2R  d          
Here's a plot showing how the maximum 1st-ball angle (α max) varies with gap distance d (it goes from 90
degrees at d=0 to 0 degrees at d=∞):
                                                         d  0  in 0.01 in  2  in

                                80

                    αmax ( d) 60

                       deg

                                40

                                20
                                     0                0.5                     1               1.5            2
                                                                              d
                                                                              in

From TP A.14, for stun shot with no sidespin (with x=ωz=0), the amount of throw θ (with speed
in units of m/s) is given by:

                              a   9.951  10 3 
                              b                                                                c v
                                0.108                                      μ( v )  a  b  e
                                1.088             
                               c                     
                                        min μ( v sin( ϕ) )  v cos( ϕ) 1   ( v sin( ϕ) ) 
                                                   v  sin( ϕ)            7
                                                                                                 
                      θ( v ϕ)  atan                                                          
                                                            v  cos( ϕ)                          

The resulting OB angle is the line-of-centers angle adjusted by throw:
                                         β( v α d )  γ( α d )  θ( v ϕ( α d ) )
To determine the optimal gap size to have throw exactly cancel cut with relatively small 1st-ball
angles, we can use a small-angle approximation for everything, where for small angle x:

               sin( x ) = x             cos( x ) = 1                        tan( x ) = x               atan( x ) = x

   The small-angle approximation for the line-of-centers angle γ is:
                                                       2R  d
                                              γ =                      1 α =
                                                                                         d
                                                                                              α
                                                    2R                                 2R

   At small angles, throw θ is in the gearing region and simplifies to:
                                                       1                1  2R  d 
                                                θ=         ϕ =                   α
                                                       7                7  2R 

   To have the OB head perfectly straight:
                                                           β=γ θ=0
   Giving:
                                                   d                1  2R  d 
                                                       α                    α = 0
                                                  2R                7  2R 

                                                       αd              ( 2R  d ) = 0
                                                                    1
                                                                   7                    
                                                                    6           2
                                                                        d =        R
                                                                    7           7
                                                               1           1 9  3
                                                   d=              R =        in =  in
                                                               3           3 8  8

  So to have the OB head straight over a fairly wide range of 1st-ball angles, the optimal gap size is
  3/8" (9.5mm). Fortunately, 9.5mm is just slightly smaller than the diameter of typical
  low-CB-deflections shafts, so it is easy to judge the optimal gap size with your tip. Alternatively,
  you can visualize the gap size as 1/3 the radius of a ball.

  From http://billiards.colostate.edu/threads/speed.html#typical, a typical range of shot speeds,
  converted to m/s is:
                    1  mph                                                 3  mph                                          7  mph
        v slow               0.447              v medium                                 1.341             v fast               3.129
                      m                                                         m                                              m
                      s                                                         s                                              s
 Here's a close up of how the OB angle β differs from 0 degrees (using a vertical scale of +/- 0.5 degrees)
 with the optimal 3/8" gap size as the 1st-ball angle α gets larger than a "small angle" (for a typical shot
 speed):

                                             α  0  deg 1  deg  20 deg

                          0.4

                          0.2

                3 
β vmedium α   in
                8        0
         deg

                       0.2

                       0.4

                                0           5                         10             15
                                                                       α
                                                                      deg

      So the 3/8" gap should yield good OB direction precision over a fairly wide range of
      1st-ball angles (+/- 20 degrees)!
     The following plots show how the resulting OB angle β varies with 1st-ball angle α at various
     shot speeds v for different gap sizes d:

                                          1
                                   d           in          αmax( d )  84.608 deg         α  0  deg 1  deg  αmax( d )
                                          100

                           4

                           2

 
β vslow α d   
      deg
                           0
 
β vmedium α d     
        deg

             
β vfast α d           2
      deg

                          4

                          6
                               0                         20                    40                     60                        80
                                                                                    α
                                                                                  deg

                                                       max throw effect at slow speed with:
                                          α  33 deg          ϕ( α d )  33.166 deg   f ( α d )  0.453

       So when the gap between the OBs is extremely small (about 1/100 of an inch), the 2nd OB
       heads in the throw direction (except at extremely large 1st-ball angles and fast speed),
       especially at slower speeds (except at really small angles where speed has no effect). The
       largest throw effect occurs close to a 1/2-ball hit (slightly thinner).
                                          1
                                   d          in            αmax( d )  73.225 deg         α  0  deg 1  deg  αmax( d )
                                          10

                          15

                          10

 
β vslow α d   
      deg

 
β vmedium α d     
                           5
        deg

             
β vfast α d

      deg

                           0

                          5
                               0                          20                             40                          60
                                                                                 α
                                                                                deg

                                                      max throw effect at slow speed with:
                                              α  31.5 deg      ϕ( α d )  33.074 deg    f ( α d )  0.454

       So when the gap between the OBs is fairly small (about 1/10 of an inch), the 2nd OB heads in
       the throw direction at smaller 1st-ball angles and slower speeds (except at really small
       angles where speed has no effect), but the 2nd OB heads in the cut direction at larger angles
       and faster speed. The largest throw effect occurs close to a 1/2-ball hit (slightly thinner).
                                            3
                                     d         in       αmax( d )  58.997 deg         α  0  deg 1  deg  αmax( d )
                                            8

                           30

                           20

 
β vslow α d   
       deg

 
β vmedium α d     
                           10
        deg

             
β vfast α d

      deg

                            0

                           10
                                 0                           20                              40                                  60
                                                                               α
                                                                              deg

                                             max angle where throw cancels cut at slow speed:
                                            α  28 deg   ϕ( α d )  33.211 deg   f ( α d )  0.452

     So when the gap between the OBs is the optimal 3/8 of an inch, the 2nd OB heads very
     straight (i.e., the throw effect cancels the cut effect) over a fairly wide range of 1st-ball
     angles. At larger angles, the 2nd OB heads in the cut direction (because the cut effect is
     larger than the throw effect).
                                          3
                                   d         in        αmax( d )  48.59  deg        α  0  deg 1  deg  αmax( d )
                                          4

                          40

                          30

 
β vslow α d   
      deg

 
β vmedium α d     
                          20
        deg

             
β vfast α d

      deg

                          10

                           0
                               0                     10          20                 30                   40                    50
                                                                           α
                                                                           deg

     So when the gap between the OBs is larger than 3/8 of an inch (here, 3/4 of an inch), the 2nd
     OB always heads in the cut direction, regardless of shot speed; although, throw reduces the
     cut more at slower speed (except at small angles where the speed has no effect).
     The following plot shows how the resulting OB angle β varies with 1st-ball angle α at various
     gap sizes d for a slow-speed shot:

                                                   1                          3                             3
                                      d small          in    d medium         in         d large         in
                                                   10                         8                             4
                              v  v slow                      
                                              αmax d small  73.225 deg                                                     
                                                                                         α  0  deg 1  deg  αmax d small

                            30

                            20

 
β v α dsmall   
       deg

 
β v α dmedium      
                            10
        deg

 
β v α dlarge   
      deg

                             0

                            10
                                  0                            20                               40                                60
                                                                                         α
                                                                                     deg

       Again, only when the gap between the OBs is 3/8" (9.5 mm) does the 2nd ball head very
       straight (i.e., the throw and cut effect cancel) over a fairly wide range of 1st-ball angles.
       With a smaller gap, the throw effect is stronger at small angles and the cut effect is stronger
       at large angles; and with a larger gap, the cut effect is stronger at all angles.
    The following plots compares gap sizes close to the optimal 3/8" (9.5 mm). From the last page of
    TP 3.4, a typical required OB angle error for a medium distance shot is +/- 1 degree, so this is
    the range OB angle β needs to be if the combo is lined up to the heart of a pocket.
   1                      3                                1
        in  6.35 mm         in  9.525  mm                 in  12.7 mm                       α  0  deg 1  deg  30 deg
   4                      8                                2
                                                                                 v  v slow

                                               2

                                   1 
                         β v α   in
                                   4 
                                               1                                                                       1
                                deg

                                   3 
                         β v α   in
                                   8  0
                                deg

                                   1 
                         β v α   in
                                   2  1                                                                           1
                                deg

                                             2
                                                   0                     10                     20                       30
                                                                                    α
                                                                                   deg
                                                                                  v  v fast

                                                   2

                                    1 
                          β v α   in
                                    4 
                                                   1                                                                       1
                                  deg

                                     3 
                           β v α   in
                                     8 
                                                   0
                                  deg

                                     1 
                           β v α   in
                                     2  1                                                                           1
                                  deg

                                               2
                                                       0                  10                     20                        30
                                                                                        α
                                                                                     deg
For a slow shot (top plot), a 3/8" gap results in excellent accuracy over a wide range of angles, as
proven above and as demonstrated in the following video:
 http://billiards.colostate.edu/normal_videos/new/NVJ-1.htm
For a fast speed shot (bottom plot), a 1/4" gap results in less accuracy for small angles (less than
about 15 degrees), but the accuracy is within +/- 1 degree over a larger range of 1st-ball angles α.
For 1st-ball angles below about 20 degrees, the error is in the throw direction, and for angle above
about 20 degrees, the error is in the cut direction.
Here's a good overall simplified "rule of thumb:" If a small-gap combo is wired to the center of a
pocket, with a gap size between 1/4" (6 mm, about 1/2 the width of a typical shaft) and 1/2" (13 mm,
about the width of a typical shaft), anything fuller than a 3/4-ball hit (14.5 degrees) between the 1st
and 2nd ball will result in pocketing the 2nd ball (at any speed).
 It is important to point out that the plots in this document will vary slightly with ball
 conditions. I used what are considered typical values for friction in my analysis, but the
 amount of throw will vary from one ball set to the next, per the ball cleaning and
 surface condition effects resource page here:
   http://billiards.colostate.edu/threads/balls.html#surface
 For example, if ball friction were 1/2 of typical values, the last plot on the previous page would change to:

                      1 μ( v  sin( ϕ) )  v  cos( ϕ)                      
                     2                                  1                   
                     min                                 ( v  sin( ϕ) ) 
   θ( v ϕ)  atan
                                 v  sin( ϕ)             7
                                                                               
                                        v  cos( ϕ)                                            β( v α d )  γ( α d )  θ( v ϕ( α d ) )

                                              2

                                1 
                      β v α   in
                                4 
                                              1                                                                      1
                             deg

                                3 
                      β v α   in
                                8 
                                              0
                             deg

                                1 
                      β v α   in
                                2  1                                                                         1
                             deg

                                          2
                                                  0                 10                   20                          30
                                                                                   α
                                                                                deg
And if ball friction were twice typical values, the last plot on the previous page would change to:

                   min ( 2 μ( v sin( ϕ) ) )  v  cos( ϕ)  1  ( v  sin( ϕ) )
                                 v  sin( ϕ)
                                                                 
                                                                7                  
 θ( v ϕ)  atan                                                                 
                                          v  cos( ϕ)                                      β( v α d )  γ( α d )  θ( v ϕ( α d ) )

                                          2

                              1 
                    β v α   in
                              4 
                                          1                                                                      1
                           deg

                              3 
                    β v α   in
                              8  0
                           deg

                              1 
                    β v α   in
                              2  1                                                                         1
                           deg

                                        2
                                              0                   10                    20                        30
                                                                               α
                                                                              deg

 Notice that the 3/8" (9.5mm) optimal value is the same, regardless of the amount of friction.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_22_how_peak_tip_contact_force_and_contact_patch_size_vary_with_shot_speed_and_drop_tests.pdf
title: TP B.22 - How peak tip contact force and contact patch size
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
TP B.22
                   How peak tip contact force and contact patch size
                        vary with shot speed, and drop tests
                                             supporting:
                          “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                      http://billiards.colostate.edu
                            by Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                         originally posted: 5/19/2018        last revision: 2/19/2023

Mass of a pool ball and typical cue stick:

                                mb ≔ 6 ⋅ oz                 ms ≔ 19 ⋅ oz

Typical tip-ball contact times for phenolic and leather tips with fast-speed shots, from the DBKcue link here:
  http://billiards.colostate.edu/threads/cue_tip.html#contact

                          Δtphenolic ≔ 0.0008 ⋅ s              Δtleather ≔ 0.0012 ⋅ s

Typical coefficients of restitution (CORs) for a phenolic tip on a break cue and a typical leather tip on
playing cue, from: http://billiards.colostate.edu/threads/cue_tip.html#efficiency

                                ephenolic ≔ 0.85                eleather ≔ 0.73

Typical contact patch sizes for a fast-speed shot with phenolic and leather tips:

                vfast ≔ 10 ⋅ mph             cpsphenolic ≔ 3 ⋅ mm                 cpsleather ≔ 4 ⋅ mm

From TP B.20, the peak force between the cue tip and CB during impact, for a given CB speed vb and tip
contact time Δt is:
                                                         2 ⋅ mb ⋅ vb
                                     Fpeak ⎛⎝vb , Δt⎞⎠ ≔ ―――
                                                             Δt

Hertz elastic contact-stress equations (e.g., from "Impact Mechanics" by Strong, pp.117-118, 2004) can be
used to approximate how contact patch size (cps) varies with peak force (F) according to:

                                                           1
                                                           ―          1
                                                           3
                                            ⎛3 F⋅E⎞        ―
                                                           3
                                      cps ＝ ⎜―――  ⎟ ＝c ⋅ F
                                            ⎝ R ⎠

where E depends on tip and CB material properties, R depends on the radii of curvature of the tip and CB,
and c is the resulting constant.

Therefore, the approximate contact patch size can be related to CB speed and tip contact time according to:
                                                                             1
                                                                             ―
                                                                             3
                                                           ⎛ 2 ⋅ mb ⋅ vb ⎞
                                 cps ⎛⎝vb , Δt , c⎞⎠ ≔ c ⋅ ⎜―――⎟
                                                           ⎝     Δt      ⎠

And the Hertz constant c can be related to contact patch size according to:
                                         Non-Commercial Use Only
                                                                    ⎛ 2 ⋅ mb ⋅ vb ⎞ 3
                                          cps ⎛⎝vb , Δt , c⎞⎠ ≔ c ⋅ ⎜―――⎟
                                                                    ⎝     Δt      ⎠

  And the Hertz constant c can be related to contact patch size according to:
                                                                                        1
                                                                                        ―
                                                                                        3
                                                                      ⎛     Δt      ⎞
                                          c ⎛⎝vb , Δt , cps⎞⎠ ≔ cps ⋅ ⎜―――⎟
                                                                      ⎝ 2 ⋅ mb ⋅ vb ⎠

  We can approximate the Hertz equation constant c for both phenolic and leather tips using the data above:
                                                                                               mm
                                    cphenolic ≔ c ⎛⎝vfast , Δtphenolic , cpsphenolic⎞⎠ = 0.242 ――
                                                                                                1
                                                                                                              ―
                                                                                                              3
                                                                                            N
                                                                                         mm
                                                 ⎛                              ⎞
                                    cleather ≔ c ⎝vfast , Δtleather , cpsleather⎠ = 0.37 ――
                                                                                          1
                                                                                                     ―
                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                 N
  As a check to make sure these values are correct, we can see if the cps equation predicts the correct
  contact patch sizes:
                                    cps ⎛⎝vfast , Δtphenolic , cphenolic⎞⎠ = 3 mm

                                    cps ⎛⎝vfast , Δtleather , cleather⎞⎠ = 4 mm

  Now we can look at how both peak contact force (in pounds) and contact patch size (in mm) vary with
  shot speed for both phenolic and leather tips:

                                           vb ≔ 1 ⋅ mph , 2 ⋅ mph ‥ 30 mph

              Fpeak ⎛⎝vb , Δtphenolic⎞⎠ ((lbf ))

              Fpeak ⎛⎝vb , Δtleather⎞⎠ ((lbf ))

1.35⋅10³

 1.2⋅10³

1.05⋅10³

    900

    750

    600

    450

    300

    150

      0
                 1         4          7           10        13        16         19         22           25       28   31

                                                                 vb ((mph ))

As expected, the peak contact force increases with CB speed, and is greater for a phenolic tip as
compared to a leather tip. With a powerful break (25 mph), the peak forces on both phenolic and
leather tips are:

           Fpeak ⎛⎝25 ⋅ mph , Δtphenolic⎞⎠ = 1068 lbf                Fpeak ⎛⎝25 ⋅ mph , Δtphenolic⎞⎠ = 4753 N
           Fpeak ⎛⎝25 ⋅ mph , Δtleather⎞⎠ = 712 lbf                  Fpeak ⎛⎝25 ⋅ mph , Δtleather⎞⎠ = 3168 N

                                                   Non-Commercial Use Only
       Fpeak ⎛⎝25 ⋅ mph , Δtleather⎞⎠ = 712 lbf                Fpeak ⎛⎝25 ⋅ mph , Δtleather⎞⎠ = 3168 N

            cps ⎛⎝vb , Δtphenolic , cphenolic⎞⎠ ((mm ))

            cps ⎛⎝vb , Δtleather , cleather⎞⎠ ((mm ))

5.85

 5.4

4.95

 4.5

4.05

 3.6

3.15

 2.7

2.25

 1.8

1.35

              1         4          7        10          13       16        19     22       25       28   31
                                                             vb ((mph ))

 As expected, the contact patch size increases with CB speed, and is larger for a leather
 tip as compared to a phenolic tip. With a powerful break (25 mph), the contact patch
 sizes for phenolic and leather tips are approximated to be:

                            cps ⎛⎝25 ⋅ mph , Δtphenolic , cphenolic⎞⎠ = 4.1 mm

                            cps ⎛⎝25 ⋅ mph , Δtleather , cleather⎞⎠ = 5.4 mm

                                            Non-Commercial Use Only
       One way to simulate cue-tip-CB impact is to drop a cue from different heights onto a heavy/solid/
       hard/flat/smooth surface (e.g., a big steel block). From conservation of energy, the cue speed v after
       falling height h is:
                                                                     v ＝ ‾‾‾‾‾
                                                                         2⋅g⋅h
       From impulse-momentum principles, if we want the impulse (and peak force) with a drop test to
       match the impulse (and peak force) of a CB hit, we can relate drop height (h) to CB speed ( vb )
       and drop rebound COR (e) with:

                                            mb ⋅ vb ＝ ms ⋅ ((v + e ⋅ v)) ＝ ms ⋅ ‾‾‾‾‾
                                                                                2 ⋅ g ⋅ h ((1 + e))
       Solving for h gives us the required drop height to simulate different CB speeds:

                                                                         1 ⎛ mb ⋅ vb ⎞
                                                                                               2
                                                         h ⎛⎝vb , e⎞⎠ ≔ ――  ⎜――――            ⎟
                                                                        2 g ⎝ ms ⋅ ((1 + e)) ⎠

  Here's a plot of how required drop height varies with simulated CB speed for both phenolic and leather tips:

          h ⎛⎝vb , ephenolic⎞⎠ ((ft ))

          h ⎛⎝vb , eleather⎞⎠ ((ft ))

1.1

 1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

 0
             1           4              7           10          13         16         19           22   25       28    31

                                                                      vb ((mph ))

      As expected, a larger drop height is required to simulate faster CB speeds, and the drop height
      for a leather tip needs to be a little higher compared to a phenolic tip. With a powerful break
      (25 mph), the required drop heights for both phenolic and leather tips are approximately:

                     h ⎛⎝25 ⋅ mph , ephenolic⎞⎠ = 0.61 ft                       h ⎛⎝25 ⋅ mph , ephenolic⎞⎠ = 18.6 cm

                     h ⎛⎝25 ⋅ mph , eleather⎞⎠ = 0.7 ft                         h ⎛⎝25 ⋅ mph , eleather⎞⎠ = 21.2 cm

                                                         Non-Commercial Use Only
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_23_cue_pivot_point_required_for_known_cb_carom_angle.pdf
title: TP B.23 - Cue Pivot Point Required for Known CB Carom Angle
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                                            technical proof
                                            TP B.23
                     Cue Pivot Point Required for Known CB Carom Angle
                                                    supporting:
                                  “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                               http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                   by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                               originally posted: 1/30/2021             last revision: 1/30/2021

      This technique is from Bob Jewett's January, 2021 Billiards Digest column. If you pivot the cue 90deg
      about a certain point along the aiming line, with the tip starting at the ghost ball, a line through the butt of
      the cue and the ghost-ball will point in the final CB direction for a rolling-CB shot.

                                    c-x

                                                                                                                      standard
                                                                                                                      cue length:
                                                              x                                       c
                                                  c                                                                    c  58 in

        The CB deflection angle (θc) is related to the pivot point (x) and cue length (c) with:
                                                                     ( c  x)
                                                              
                                                          tan θc =
                                                                          x

        So the required pivot point to create a known CB deflection angle is:
                                                                           c
                                                            
                                                          x θc 
                                                                          
                                                                    tan θc  1

        Using the CB deflection angles (θc) for standard ball-hit-fractions (f) from page 8 in TP A.6,
        the required pivot distances from the tip for a standard-length cue are:
                         1
                  f 
                         2
                               θc  34 deg            
                                                      x θc  34.6 in
                                                                                                   30 degree rule average:
                         1
                  f 
                         4
                               θc  27 deg            
                                                      x θc  38.4 in                                      θc  30 deg

                         3                                                                                  
                                                                                                       x θc  36.8 in
                  f 
                         4
                               θc  28 deg            
                                                      x θc  37.9 in
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_24_estimating_rolling_cb_carom_angle_with_1_4_cue_point.pdf
title: TP B.24 - Estimating Rolling CB Carom Angle with 1/4 Cue Point
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                               technical proof

                                           TP B.24
                    Estimating Rolling CB Carom Angle with 1/4 Cue Point
                                                     supporting:
                                   “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                              http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                       by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                               originally posted: 1/31/2021           last revision: 1/31/2021

                                                         L/4

                                                                             tangent
                                       L                                     line (T)

                                                                             
                                                                                        90º
                                                                        c

                                                                                                        c

   The CB carom angle (c) can be approximated for any cut angle () by pointing the cue in the OB direction
   with the tip at the ghost ball and shifting the cue parallel up the tangent line (distance T) until the butt end is
   along the aiming line. A line from the L/4 point on the cue through the ghost ball will approximate the carom
   angle. This is based on the theoretical approach diagrammed on page 7 in TP A.4. The change in ratio from
   2/7 to 1/4 is a simplification since half of half (1/4) is easy to visualize (although, any point on the cue can
   be marked). Below are the equations describing the variables in the diagram above, where the carom line
   originates from a factor (f) of the length (1/4 in the diagram). An option to using the entire cue is just use the
   shaft, with the joint on the aiming line instead of the butt, with the carom line again going through the
   length-factor point (e.g., 1/4 of the shaft length).

                                   T                      f L
                       tan( ϕ) =             tan( α) =                   θc = 90 deg  ϕ  α
                                   L                       T

                  So the CB carom angle can be approximated by:

                           θca ( ϕ f )  90 deg  ϕ  atan
                                                                    f                               1
                                                                                             f 
                                                                 
                                                                 tan( ϕ)                            4
         From TP A.6, the theoretical CB carom angle, accounting for ball inelasticiy and friction, is:

                                                e  0.94            μballs  0.06             v  2                    2.25
                                                                                                                                  in
                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                   R 
                   ωx0 v ϕ e μballs     μballs  ( 1  e)  cos( ϕ)  1
                                            v 5
                                          R 4      
                                                                               3
                                                                                            
                                                                                                                            m

                   ωy0 v ϕ e μballs     μballs  ( 1  e)  sin( ϕ)  cos( ϕ) 
                                            v      5
                                          R 4      
                                                                                           2
                                                                                                    
                                                v
                                         
                   v x0 v ϕ e μballs 
                                                2
                                                     sin( ϕ)  cos( ϕ)  1  e  μballs  ( 1  e)  cos( ϕ)
                                                                                                            

                                                v 
                                                 sin( ϕ)  2  μballs  ( 1  e)  cos( ϕ)  ( 1  e)  cos( ϕ) 
                                                           2                                                        2
                   v y0 v ϕ e μballs 
                                                2                                                                 

                                                                                                   
                                                  5  vx0 v ϕ e μballs  2  R ωy0 v ϕ e μballs     
                                         
                    θc v ϕ e μballs  atan                                                            
                                                                                                   
                                                  5  vy0 v ϕ e μballs  2  R ωx0 v ϕ e μballs     

Here's how cue ball carom angle varies with cut angle and ball-hit fraction (bhf) for length factors
of 1/4 (approximation) and 2/7 (ideal with no inelasticity or friction):

                                                ϕ  0  deg 1  deg  90 deg           bhf ( ϕ)  1  sin( ϕ)

                                40

                                30

   
θc v ϕ e μballs      
             deg

    1                         20
θcaϕ  
    4
       deg

    2
θcaϕ                        10
    7
       deg

                                 0

                                10
                                      0                    20                          40                         60                    80
                                                                                                ϕ
                                                                                             deg
                             40

                             30

   
θc v ϕ e μballs   
             deg

    1
θcaϕ  
                             20

    4
       deg

    2
θcaϕ                     10
    7
       deg

                              0

                             10
                                   0         0.2                     0.4                           0.6    0.8
                                                                                   bhf ( ϕ)

  The ideal 2/7 length factor obviously provides a better match than the 1/4 approximation, but the
  approximation works fairly well over all cut angles.

  Here is the error in the 1/4 approximation as compared to the actual CB carom angle:

                                                   E( ϕ)  θca  ϕ 
                                                                          1
                                                                             θc v ϕ e μballs
                                                                         4

                                              4

                                              3

                                       E( ϕ) 2
                                       deg
                                              1

                                              0

                                             1
                                                          20         40            60         80
                                                                          ϕ
                                                                      deg

                                                    ϕ  20 deg          initial guess

                   ϕmax  maximize( E ϕ)  15.886 deg                                
                                                                          bhf ϕmax  0.726                     
                                                                                                         E ϕmax  3.06 deg
                 If you want to mark your cue or shaft with the ideal length factor to match the carom angle well
                 over a wide range, use:

                                                       1
                               ϕ  30 deg     f 
                                                       4
                                                                                                      
                                                                        E( f )  θca ( ϕ f )  θc v ϕ e μballs   
                                                 fopt  root( E( f ) f )                 fopt  0.281

                               So if using the entire cue of standard length, the carom line point should be at:

                                                 L  58 in                       fopt  L  16.3 in

                                                 L  147.3 cm                      fopt  L  41.4 cm

                               If only using only a standard-length shaft or butt, the carom line point should be at:

                                                 L  29 in                       fopt  L  8.2 in

                                                 L  73.7 cm                       fopt  L  20.7 cm

  As you can see below, the approximated carom angle matches the actual very well over all cut angles:

                                                                  ϕ  0  deg 1  deg  90 deg

                          40

                          30

   
θc v ϕ e μballs    20
             deg

       
θca ϕ fopt       
           deg            10

                           0

                         10
                               0                  20                          40                          60                  80
                                                                                     ϕ
                                                                                    deg
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_25_percentage_outside_spin_required_for_maximum_sit_at_any_cut_angle.pdf
title: TP B.25 - Percentage Outside Spin Required for Maximum SIT at Any Cut Angle
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                              technical proof

                                 TP B.25
  Percentage Outside Spin Required for Maximum SIT at Any Cut Angle
                                                      supporting:
                                  “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                             https://drdavepoolinfo.com/
                                   by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                             originally posted: 6/16/2021       last revision: 3/5/2025

From TP A.14, throw is calculated with the following, where speeds are in units of m/s:

                                                         a   9.951  10- 3 
                              1.125 in                  b  :=
                       R :=                                         0.108                                                  - c v
                                  m                                                                  μ ( v) := a + b  e
                                                        c                   
                                                                     1.088      

                                   (             )   (v sin( ϕ) - R ωz) + ( R ωx cos(ϕ) )
                                                                                 2                     2
                              vrel v , ωx , ωz , ϕ :=

                                                μ ( vrel( v , ωx , ωz , ϕ) ) v cos( ϕ) 1                         
                                               min                                      ,   ( v sin( ϕ) - R ωz) 
                                                          vrel ( v , ωx , ωz , ϕ)        7                          
              θthrow( v , ωx , ωz , ϕ) := atan
                                                                                             
                                                                                                                      
                                                                             v cos( ϕ)                              

From https://drdavepoolinfo.com/faq/speed/typical/, a typical range of CB speeds, converted to m/s is:

                       1  mph                                           3  mph                                              7  mph
         vslow :=                = 0.447                vmedium :=                   = 1.341                    vfast :=                = 3.129
                         m                                                   m                                                      m
                         s                                                   s                                                      s

From TP A.25, percentage spin (PS) is related to spin rate ω (rad/sec) with:

                                                                             5 v
                                                            ω( v , PS ) :=      PS
                                                                             4 R

For a slow stun shot, where spin-induced throw (SIT) is maximum, SIT for a given percentage outside
spin (PS) is:

                                             θSIT ( v , PS , ϕ) := -θthrow( v , 0 , ω( v , PS ) , ϕ)
Here is how spin-induced throw (SIT) varies with percentage outside spin (PS) for slow and fast shots:
                                                                        PS := 0 , .05 .. 1

              straight shot:                   ϕ := 0

                                               6

                                               4
                     (
              θ SIT vslow , PS , ϕ         )
                          deg

                     (
              θ SIT vfast , PS , ϕ     )
                          deg
                                               2

                                               0
                                                   0               20       40                60    80
                                                                                     PS
                                                                                     %

                 1/2-ball hit:                     ϕ := 30 deg

                                           6

                                           4
                 (
            θ SIT vslow , PS , ϕ       )
                         deg

                 (
            θ SIT vfast , PS , ϕ   )
                         deg
                                           2

                                           0
                                               0                  20      40                 60    80    100
                                                                                   PS
                                                                                   %
     Now finding the percentage outside spin that results in the maximum spin-induced throw for a range of cut angles:

                                                                                                 T
                            ϕA := ( 0  deg 15 deg 30 deg 45 deg 60 deg 75 deg 85 deg )                 PS := 0.95
                                                                                                              initial guess
v := vslow

               i := 0      ϕ := ϕA
                                  i
                                             θSIT ( PS) := -θthrow( v , 0 , ω( v , PS) , ϕ)                          (
                                                                                                 POS := Maximize θSIT , PS
                                                                                                      i                       )

               i := 1      ϕ := ϕA
                                  i
                                             θSIT ( PS) := -θthrow( v , 0 , ω( v , PS) , ϕ)                          (
                                                                                                 POS := Maximize θSIT , PS
                                                                                                      i                       )

               i := 2      ϕ := ϕA
                                  i
                                             θSIT ( PS) := -θthrow( v , 0 , ω( v , PS) , ϕ)                          (
                                                                                                 POS := Maximize θSIT , PS
                                                                                                      i                       )

               i := 3      ϕ := ϕA
                                  i
                                             θSIT ( PS) := -θthrow( v , 0 , ω( v , PS) , ϕ)                          (
                                                                                                 POS := Maximize θSIT , PS
                                                                                                      i                       )

               i := 4      ϕ := ϕA
                                  i
                                             θSIT ( PS) := -θthrow( v , 0 , ω( v , PS) , ϕ)                          (
                                                                                                 POS := Maximize θSIT , PS
                                                                                                      i                       )

               i := 5      ϕ := ϕA
                                  i
                                             θSIT ( PS) := -θthrow( v , 0 , ω( v , PS) , ϕ)                          (
                                                                                                 POS := Maximize θSIT , PS
                                                                                                      i                       )

               i := 6      ϕ := ϕA
                                  i
                                             θSIT ( PS) := -θthrow( v , 0 , ω( v , PS) , ϕ)                          (
                                                                                                 POS := Maximize θSIT , PS
                                                                                                      i                       )
 POSslow := POS

  v := vfast

                  i := 0     ϕ := ϕA
                                      i
                                                θSIT ( PS) := -θthrow( v , 0 , ω( v , PS) , ϕ)                           (
                                                                                                     POS := Maximize θSIT , PS
                                                                                                          i                       )

                  i := 1     ϕ := ϕA
                                      i
                                                θSIT ( PS) := -θthrow( v , 0 , ω( v , PS) , ϕ)                           (
                                                                                                     POS := Maximize θSIT , PS
                                                                                                          i                       )

                  i := 2     ϕ := ϕA
                                      i
                                                θSIT ( PS) := -θthrow( v , 0 , ω( v , PS) , ϕ)                           (
                                                                                                     POS := Maximize θSIT , PS
                                                                                                          i                       )

                  i := 3     ϕ := ϕA
                                      i
                                                θSIT ( PS) := -θthrow( v , 0 , ω( v , PS) , ϕ)                           (
                                                                                                     POS := Maximize θSIT , PS
                                                                                                          i                       )

                  i := 4     ϕ := ϕA
                                      i
                                                θSIT ( PS) := -θthrow( v , 0 , ω( v , PS) , ϕ)                           (
                                                                                                     POS := Maximize θSIT , PS
                                                                                                          i                       )

                  i := 5     ϕ := ϕA
                                      i
                                                θSIT ( PS) := -θthrow( v , 0 , ω( v , PS) , ϕ)                           (
                                                                                                     POS := Maximize θSIT , PS
                                                                                                          i                       )

                  i := 6     ϕ := ϕA
                                      i
                                                θSIT ( PS) := -θthrow( v , 0 , ω( v , PS) , ϕ)                           (
                                                                                                     POS := Maximize θSIT , PS
                                                                                                          i                       )
    POSfast := POS
Here is how the percentage outside spin (POS) required for maximum spin-induced throw (SIT)
varies with cut angle (ϕA) for both slow and fast shots:

                                   100

                                       80

                       POSslow

                          %
                                       60
                       POSfast

                         %

                                       40

                                       20
                                            0           20                40                60                 80
                                                                               ϕA
                                                                               deg

  And here's how much throw you can get at each of those angles:
                                                    θSIT ( v , PS , ϕ) := -θthrow( v , 0 , ω( v , PS ) , ϕ)

                                            7

                                            6

           (
      θ SIT vslow , POSslow , ϕA       )5
                   deg

           (
      θ SIT vfast , POSfast , ϕA   )
                 deg                        4

                                            3

                                            2
                                                0        20               40                60                80
                                                                               ϕA
                                                                               deg

 With a fairly straight shot, only about 50% of maximum outside spin is required to get maximum
 spin-induced throw (SIT) at slow speed. For large cut angles, much more outside spin is required for
 maximum SIT, and more throw is possible (for a given CB speed).
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_26_bhe_fhe_pivot_percentage_relation_to_cue_natural_pivot_length.pdf
title: TP B.26 - BHE/FHE Pivot Percentage Relation to Cue Natural Pivot Length
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                                  technical proof
                                                         TP B.26
                        BHE/FHE Pivot Percentage Relation to Cue Natural Pivot Length

                                                     supporting:
                                   “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                              http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                     by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                  originally posted: 2/18/2022               last revision: 2/24/2022

                               Thank you to Robert Barrett for suggesting this analysis

          For background information, see the back-hand-english (BHE) / front-hand-english (FHE) resources page:

                                https://billiards.colostate.edu/faq/sidespin/bhe-fhe/

          If the bridge is at the natural pivot length (N) of the shaft, with a total tip offset of x and cue pivot of θ, for
          small angles (where tan θ = sin θ = θ),

                                                                         x
                                                              θ=
                                                                         N

          This total pivot angle and tip offset can instead be created by an appropriate combination of BHE and FHE
          with a given grip length G and bridge length B, both measured from the tip. The percentage of the total tip
          offset and pivot angle resulting from the BHE portion of the pivot is P. The remaining percentage (1-P)
          applies to the FHE portion of the pivot.

          The BHE pivot with tip offset xB and cue pivot angle θB is defined by:

                                                                xB   P x
                                                           θB =    =
                                                                B     B

          The FHE pivot with tip offset xF and cue pivot angle θF is defined by:

                                                              xF   ( 1  P)  x
                                                         θF =    =
                                                              G         G

          The total tip offset and total cue pivot angle must match the natural pivot length values, so:

                                  x = xB  xF                       and                      θ = θB  θF

          Using the second equation and the definitions above:

                                                          x       P x        ( 1  P)  x
                                                              =          
                                                         N        B               G
Rearranging and solving for the required percentage of BHE gives:

                                                  B         1
                                                          G

                                             P=
                                                     N          
                                                    ( G  B)

With the bridge length at the natural pivot length of the shaft (B=N), the percentage of
BHE is 100% (P=1), with no FHE pivot.

With a bridge length shorter than the natural pivot length (B<N), the percentage of BHE
is less than 100% (P<1), and the FHE percentage completes the total pivot to 100%.

With a bridge length longer than the natural pivot length (B>N), and the percentage of
BHE is greater than 100% (P>1), with the FHE percentage being the negative of the
excess beyond 100%.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_27_sliding_bank_system_comparison.pdf
title: TP B.27 - Sliding Bank System Comparison
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
TP B.27
 technical proof                                                                                                                        technical proof
                                                                   Sliding Bank System Comparisons

                                                                                supporting:
                                                            “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                                                       http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                                              by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                                           originally posted: 8/9/2023    last revision: 8/10/2023

                                                               for background and demonstrations see:
                             "NV L.30 – SLIDING BANK SHOT DIAMOND SYSTEMS … How to Aim Banks at Fast-Speed or Close-to-the-Cushion:"
                                                         https://billiards.colostate.edu/normal-video/nv-l-30/

Measured Through-Diamond Bank Reference Lines:

                                                        aim point on the banking rail:                                  T
                                                                                             aim := ( .5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 )

                                            where the cue crosses the opposite rail:                                                T
                                                                                             cue := ( 1.38 2.72 3.89 5.07 6.38 7.74 )

1-More-Than-Twice Through-Diamond System:

                                                                              one_more( x) := 2 x + 1

Eckert Aim Between 1/4 and 1/2 or Briesath Adding Thirds Through-Diamond Systems:

                                                                                                 8
                                                                                 thirds( x) :=       x
                                                                                                 3
Dr Dave Rail-Groove (across diamond) 1/3-of-a-Diamond-More-Than-Twice System:
                                                                                                                                                                 4.25
                             diamond distance:       D := 12.5            distance between diamond and rail groove lines (in diamonds):                 d :=
                                                                                                                                                                     D
                                                                                                                     48.25
                             measured width across table between rail grooves (in diamonds):                 w :=
                                                                                                                       D

                                       x
                                                                                                                                                                     diamond
                                                                                                                                                                        line
                            d
                                                                                                                                                                       rail
                                                                                                                                                                     groove
                                                 a

                            w

                                                                        2a + 1/3

                                                                                   y

                                                      rail-groove across-diamond point (a) based on through-diamond aim point (x):

                                                               1                                                                                            1
                                                          a+                                                                                           a+
                                                               3                              d + 3  w x                                     1            3
                                           x( a) := a -            d              a( x) :=                         one_third( a) := 2  a +       +            d
                                                           w                                  3 w - 3  d                                     3        w
Optimal System (measuring across from the diamonds in the rail grooves at a fraction (f) more than twice):

                                          x
                                                                                                                                                                               diamond
                                                                                                                                                                                  line
                              d
                                                                                                                                                                                 rail
                                                                                                                                                                               groove
                                                  a

                             w

                                                                       (2+f) a

                                                                                    y

                                                                                                                       1
                                              optimal factor (for best fit of measured data below):             f :=
                                                                                                                       5

                                                                                                        x
                                              (1 + f )a                          aopt( x) :=                                                                (1 + f )a
                            xopt( a) := a -                d                                         d (1 + f )               opt( a) := ( 2 + f )  a +                d
                                                  w                                             1-                                                               w
                                                                                                            w

                                                                                                                            T
                                        example banking rail rail groove across diamond numbers:                        aim = ( 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 )

                                        corresponding cue crossing point in opposite rail groove:                                    T
                                                                                                                       ( 2 + f )  aim = ( 1.1 2.2 3.3 4.4 5.5 6.6 )

                         OPTIMAL SYSTEM: twice plus 10% (or a tenth) of twice, measured in the rail grooves across from the diamonds
                           Through-Diamond Cue Rail-Crossing-Point Diamond vs. Aim Point Diamond on the Banking Rail         x := .4 , .55 .. 3.1

                     8

                     7

                     6

cue
                     5
one_more( x)

thirds ( x)

one_third( a( x) )

    (
opt aopt ( x)   ) 4

                     3

                     2

                     1
                     0.5           1                         1.5                             2                         2.5                 3
                                                                       aim , x , x , x , x
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_28_sliding_bank_shot_table_comparisons_from_careful_measurements.pdf
title: TP B.28 - Sliding Bank Shot Table Comparisons From Careful Measurements
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
TP B.28
technical proof                                                                                                                                                                        technical proof
                                                    Sliding-Bank-Shot Table Comparisons From Careful Measurements

                                                                                      supporting:
                                                                  “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                                                            http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                                                   by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                                                 originally posted: 8/24/2023         last revision: 8/26/2023

                                                                 for background and demonstrations see:
                            "NV L.30 – SLIDING BANK SHOT DIAMOND SYSTEMS … How to Aim Banks at Fast-Speed or Close-to-the-Cushion:"
                                                          https://billiards.colostate.edu/normal-video/nv-l-30/
                                   and "NV L.32 – TWICE-PLUS-TENTH … The Most Useful Bank Shot Diamond System You’ll Ever Learn:"
                                                          https://billiards.colostate.edu/normal-video/nv-l-32/

                  Carefully Measured Through-Diamond Points on Opposite Rail (meas) for Each Diamond Aim Point on the Banking Rail (aim):

                                                                                                                             T                                                     T
9' Olhaussen (Dr. Dave's video table) Bank Reference Lines:                       aim := ( .5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 )                           meas := ( 1.38 2.72 3.89 5.07 6.38 7.74 )

                                                                                           T
9' "Red Label" Diamond:          measRD := ( 1.40 2.93 4.52 5.60 6.92 8.30 )

                                                                            T
7' Valley Bar Box:       measV := ( 1.51 2.74 4.12 5.19 6.52 7.54 )
                                                                                                                             NOTE - all the tables, except the 9' Olhaussen,
                                                                                       T                                     were under slightly humid conditions,
9' Brunswick Gold Crown:        measGC := ( 1.27 2.88 4.38 5.38 6.56 7.96 )
                                                                                                                             with old, worn-in cloth.

                                                                                 T
7' Diamond Bar Box:          measDB := ( 1.6 3.31 4.94 6.22 7.55 8.59 )

Dr Dave's Twice-Plus-Tenths Diamond System (from TP B.27):
                                                                                               4.25                  48.25              1
                                                                    D := 12.5         d :=                 w :=                  f :=
                                                                                                D                     D                 5
                                                                                                             x
                                               (1 + f )a                            aopt( x) :=                                                                 (1 + f )a
                             xopt( a) := a -                d                                             d (1 + f )              opt( a) := ( 2 + f )  a +                d
                                                   w                                                  1-                                                             w
                                                                                                                 w
                                                               Through-Diamond Sliding Bank Shot Table Comparison                x := .4 , .55 .. 3.1

                                                     8

                                                     7

                                                     6
Diamond Aim Point on Opposite Rail

                                     meas

                                        (
                                     opt aopt ( x)   )5
                                     measRD

                                     measV

                                     measGC
                                                     4
                                     measDB

                                                     3

                                                     2

                                                     1
                                                     0.5   1                   1.5                                     2   2.5                  3
                                                                                     aim , x , aim , aim , aim , aim

                                                                          Diamond Aim Point on Banking Rail
Conclusions:

1) The twice-plus-tenth system matches measured data very well on typical tables under typical conditions.

2) The 9' Olhaussen and 7' Valley tables banked very close to "on system."

2) A Brunswick Gold Crown usually plays "on system," but under humind and used-cloth conditions, it plays a little short,
  especialy at medium bank angles.

3) Diamond tables (9' Red Label and 7' bar box) banked very short, especially at larger bank angles. For more info, see:
  https://billiards.colostate.edu/faq/bank-kick/Diamond/

4) The 7' Diamond bar-box banked almost a diamond shorter than typical "on system" tables!
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_29_simulation_of_a_cb_striking_two_frozen_obs_along_their_line_of_centers.pdf
title: TP B.29 - Simulation of a CB striking two frozen OBs along their line of centers
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, aiming_and_potting, robotics_and_computation
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
technical proof                                                                                                   technical proof
                                                                  TP B.29
                              Simulation of a CB striking two frozen OBs along their line of centers

                                                              supporting:
                                          “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                                    http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                           by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                 originally posted: 8/6/2024                    last revision: 8/7/2024

From "Impact Mechanics" by Stronge (2000) on p. 118, based on Hertz contact stress calculations, for two balls
of radius "R" colliding, the radius of the contact patch "a" for a given compressive force "F" between the balls is
given by:
                                                                                      1
                                                                      R               3
                                                                 a=        ( c F)
                                                                      2

where "c" is a constant related to ball properties.

The force is related to the total compression of the balls "δ" according to:

                                                                                      3
                                                                                      2
                                                                    1  2 δ 
                                                               F=          
                                                                    c  R 

The constant "c" can be found from this equation if the force and compression are known:
                                                                                  3
                                                                                  2
                                                                     2 δ 
                                                                     
                                                                 c=
                                                                     R 
                                                                            F

Here are numbers from experimental data reported by Marlow on p. 45 of "The Physics of Pocket Billiards" (1995):

           R := 1.125 in                          ball radius

           M := 6  oz                             ball mass
                      m
           v := 1        = 2.237 mph             ball speed
                      s
                           -6
         ΔT := 284 10          s                 ball contact time
                           -3
           ε := 3.49 10                           ball strain (ΔR/R) at full compression

           δ := 2  R ε = 0.2 mm                 total compression of both balls at full compression

           F := 2270 N = 510.3 lbf               force at full compression
The constant "c" in the equation above can be calculated from this experimental data:

                                                                    3
                                                                    2
                                                         2 δ 
                                                         
                                                   c :=
                                                         R             = 7.266  10
                                                                                          -7 1
                                                                F                             N

The contact patch size can be calculated using this value:

                                                        1
                                        R               3
                                 a :=        ( c F)       = 1.69 mm                 2  a = 3.38 mm
                                        2

Stripping units off everything (assuming SI units) for the program below to work properly:
                                 R                                       M                                v
                        R :=         = 0.029                     M :=         = 0.17              v :=         =1
                                 m                                       kg                              m
                                                                                                          s
                                                   ΔT                    -4                                      -7
                                        ΔT :=               = 2.84  10             c := c N = 7.266  10
                                                    s

Knowing the constant "c," the compressive force between two balls can be calculated, given the amount of
compression "δ" between the balls:

                                                                                          3
                                                                                          2
                                                                             1  2 δ 
                                                                 F( δ) :=           
                                                                             c  R 

               Simulation of a CB striking two frozen balls along the line of centers

 Now a simple numerical simulation will be performed to see how three balls move during the collision, where the
 CB strikes two frozen OBs along their line of centers. The CB is labeled as ball "1" and the OBs are labeled "2"
 and "3." The position, speed, and acceleration of each ball are designated by "x," "v," and "a." The force
 between the first two balls is "F12," and the force between the 2nd and 3rd balls is "F23." A more proper Runge
 Kutta approach, numerically solving the simultaneous non-linear equations of motion would be more efficient, but
 with a small enough time step, the simple procedure below is sufficient, where the speed and acceleration are
 assumed to be constant during each time step:

                                                                                       ΔT
                     true := 1                          n := 10000             Δt :=                          D := 2 R
                                                                                          n
 nt 
 
 v1 
v 
 2  := i  0
 v3 
       x1  0
           0
 12 
 F
F      x2  D
           0
 23
        x3  2  D
          0
        v1  v
          0
        v2  0
          0
        v3  0
          0
        a1  0
          0
        a2  0
          0
        a3  0
          0
        F12  0
           0
        F23  0
           0
        while ( true)
                                      1          2
              x1       x1 + v1  Δt +  a1  Δt
                 i+ 1     i    i      2    i
                                      1          2
              x2       x2 + v2  Δt +  a2  Δt
                 i+ 1     i    i      2    i
                                      1          2
              x3       x3 + v3  Δt +  a3  Δt
                 i+ 1     i    i      2    i
              v1       v1 + a1  Δt
                 i+ 1     i    i
              v2       v2 + a2  Δt
                 i+ 1     i    i
              v3       v3 + a3  Δt
                 i+ 1     i    i
              δ12  D -  x2      - x1 
                            i+ 1     i+ 1
              δ23  D -  x3     - x2 
                           i+1       i+ 1
              break if ( δ12  0 )  ( δ23  0 )
                                                
              F12
                 i+ 1
                           (            ( ) )
                       if δ12 > 0 , F δ12 , 0

              F23      if ( δ23 > 0 , F( δ23) , 0 )
                 i+ 1
                              -F12
                                    i+1
              a1          
                   i+ 1         M
                             F12 - F23 
              a2          
                             i+1      i+ 1
                   i+ 1                   M
                                        i+ 1                  M
                                                    F23
                                                       i+ 1
                                   a3          
                                        i+ 1          M
                                   ii+1

                                         (
                               return i + 1 v1 v2 v3 F12 F23                )T

                                        4
                      n t = 1.772  10                i := 0 .. n t        t := i  Δt
                                                                           i

      1

v1
     0.5
v2

v3

      0                                                                                           0

                  -4                           -4                     -4                     -4
           0   110                  2 10                        3 10                  4 10
                                                          t
               3
          1 10

             800

             600
  F12

  F23

             400

             200

               0
                                               -4                    -4                      -4                   -4
                   0                       1 10                2 10                   3 10                410
                                                                               t

starting ball 1 speed:
               v1 = 1
                 0

ending ball speeds:
                   v1 = -0.071                           v2 = 0.076                        v3 = 0.995
                     n     t                               nt                                n    t

momentum is conserved:
               v1 + v2 + v3 = 1
                 n    nt   n       t      t

energy is conserved:
                               2          2         2
                v1 n  +  v2 n  +  v3 n  = 1
                t  t  t

collision times:
                                                    -4                                                                        -4
           two balls:                  ΔT = 2.84  10                              three balls:       n t  Δt = 5.031  10

                                                          n t  Δt
                                                                     = 1.771
                                                           ΔT
Results of the simulation:

 - The CB bounces back from the two OBs slightly, and separates from the OBs while they are still interacting.
 - The 1st OB moves forward slightly after the collision.
 - The 2nd OB has a similar speed after the collision as the CB did before the collision.
 - The CB feels a larger force since it is pushing against two frozen balls. The 2nd OB feels less force since it
 has no ball to its right and since the CB separates while the OBs are still interacting.
 - During compression, all 3 balls are moving forward together, partly explaining why the 1st OB moves forward
 after the collision. Also, the force from the CB side is larger, also explaining the forward motion of the 1st OB.
 - The total collision time for the 3 balls is 77% longer than the collision time for 2 balls.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_2_rolling_resistance_spin_resistance_and_ball_turn.pdf
title: TP B.2 - Rolling resistance, spin resistance, and "ball turn
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
technical proof                                                                                technical proof
                                         TP B.2
                  Rolling resistance, spin resistance, and "ball turn"
                                            supporting:
                          “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                   http://billiards.colostate.edu
                          by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                    originally posted: 1/14/2008    last revision: 2/1/2008

        Here are the forces acting on a rolling ball:

                                mg
                  
                                                                      m: ball mass        m  6  oz

                                           v, -a                      I: ball mass moment of inertia

                                                                      R: ball radius        R  1.125  in

                                                                       r: coefficient of rolling resistance
                                        rmg

                                   mg
                               d

        The translational equation of motion is:

                                                   ΣFx = m ax
                                                                                                                 ( 1)
                                               μr m g = m ( a)

        The ball acceleration "a x" is negative because the ball is decelerating. So the coefficient
        of rolling resistance (CORR) is related to the ball's deceleration according to:

                                                        a
                                                   μr =                                                          ( 2)
                                                        g

        The rate of deceleration (a) can easily be determined experimentally by timing how long
        (T) it takes a rolling ball to travel a certain distance (L) to a full stop.
From basic kinematics, the distance is related to deceleration and time with:

                                   1            2                         1        2      1         2
                    L = v  ΔT         a ΔT = ( a ΔT)  ΔT                a ΔT =        a ΔT   ( 3)
                                   2                                      2               2

so the deceleration rate can be determined with:

                                                       2 L
                                               a=
                                                          2                                             ( 4)
                                                      ΔT

Substituting Equation 4 into Equation 2 allows us to calculate the CORR from
experimental measurements:

                                                       2 L
                                             μr =                                                       ( 5)
                                                              2
                                                      g  ΔT

I ran a few experiments on a typical cloth and got an average value of:

                                               μr  0.01

This number will obviously vary with cloth type and conditions. A "fast" cloth will have a
lower CORR, and a slow cloth with have a higher CORR.

Returning to the diagram above, assuming the ball radius is much larger than the cloth
dimple size, the rotational equation of motion (using Equation 2) is:

                                                     T = I α

                             d  m g  R μr m g =   m R    
                                                        2      2       a
                                                                                                        ( 6)
                                                       5          R

                                d  R μr mg = 5 μr R m g
                                                              2

So, from Equation 6, the distance the vertical force is shifted forward is:

                                       7
                               d          μr R                d  0.016  in                        ( 7)
                                       5
The forces in the diagram on the previous page can be represented by resultant normal
force N and tangential friction force F as shown below, where the normal force acts
through the center of the ball:

                        Ts              s
                                 

                                                           z
                       r
                                                                    t

                                                   v               y
                                                                               x

                                          Ft
                                 F
                                              N

 From Equation 6, the tangential friction force, which creates torque T, is:

                                          T        2
                                     F=        =    μ  m g                                      ( 8)
                                          R        5 r

 Equating the horizontal force components from both diagrams gives:
                                N sin( θ)  F cos( θ) = μr m g                                ( 9)

 Equating the vertical components gives:
                                                                                                  ( 10)
                                 N cos( θ)  F sin( θ) = m g

 Eliminating N from Equations 9 and 10 gives:

                                          
                                 F = mg sin( θ)  μr cos( θ)                                    ( 11)

 Substituting Equation 8 gives:
                                                               2
                                 μr cos( θ)  sin( θ) =           μr                           ( 12)
                                                               5

 This is of the general form:
                                                                                                  ( 13)
                                 A cos( θ)  B sin( θ) = C

 where A=- r, B=1, and C=2/5 r. Equation 13 has the solutions (from
 tangent-half-angle substitutions):
                B  B2  A2  C2                                          B  B2  A2  C2 
    θ1 = 2 atan                              and      θ2 = 2 atan                             ( 14)
                    A C                                                      A C         
Therefore, choosing the acute angle solution, the angle of the resultant normal is:

                                                        2
                                  1  1  μ 2   2 μ  
                                           r     r 
                         θ = 2atan
                                                 5 
                                              2                                            ( 15)
                                       μr   μr        
                                             5           
 Simplifying gives:
                       5   1  21  μ 2  1
        θ  2  atan                                                 θ  0.802  deg   ( 16)
                                  25 r
                       3  μr               

 This is the angle at which the effective center of pressure normal force acts. I will assume
 that when the ball also has sidespin, the resultant forces related to rolling resistance (N
 and F) do not change very much.

 When a ball spins in place, a friction torque develops in the cloth dimple which
 opposes the motion. From spin-down tests with a video camera, typical measured
 deceleration rates are approximately:
                                                rad
                                 αmeas  10                                     ( 17)
                                                   2
                                               sec

 This corresponds to a friction torque of:
                                           Ts = I αmeas
                                                                                            ( 18)
                            2          2                                     3
                    Ts         m R  αmeas             Ts  4.917  10       in lbf
                            5

 As shown in the diagram above, I will assume this spin-down torque is aligned with the
 center-of-pressure resultant normal vector (N) while the ball is rolling. I will also assume
 the torque magnitude is approximately the same as with the static spin-down test.

 The shape of the ball-cloth dimple and the distribution of friction forces within the dimple
 are not known; but if the ball turns, the friction forces must have a sideways resultant that
 makes the ball turn (Ft in the diagram). If not, the analysis will predict a value of 0 for F t.
 A possible explanation for this force is that the friction force on the leading edge of the
 dimple might be greater than the friction force on the trailing edge. The force could also
 represent the cloth's resistance to any tendency for masse spin to develop as a result of
 the torques and turning motion.

 If we assume the ball's velocity turns, and if we have the z axis remain vertical and the x
 axis remain in-line with the ball's velocity, then the angular velocity of the ball is:
                                                          v ˆ
                                    r ˆj   s kˆ        j   s kˆ                      ( 19)
                                                           R
 Here, I am assuming no masse spin develops while the ball is rolling. Even if there is a
 tendency for masse spin to develop, I am assuming cloth forces will develop (as part of F t)
 to counter the spin tendency.
The angular velocity of the frame is:
                                        
                                          t kˆ                                          ( 20)

where t is the turn rate.

If the ball's velocity turns, there must also be a turning force (F t in the diagram) pushing
the ball in the turn direction. The translational equation of motion of the ball in the y
direction gives:
                                                    2
                                                 v
                                         Ft = m                                            ( 21)
                                                 ρ

where  is the radius of curvature of the turn. The turn rate is related to the radius of
curvature with:
                                             v
                                        Ωt =
                                             ρ                                          ( 22)

Solving for  in Equation 22 and substituting into Equation 21 gives the following
expression relating the turning force to the turn rate:

                                         Ft = m v  Ωt                                     ( 23)

The moment acting on the ball due to the reaction forces (from the original diagram,
on page 1) and the spin-down friction torque (from the diagram above, on page 3) is:

M  Ts sin    Ft R cos iˆ   r mgR  mgd  ˆj  Ts cos   Ft R sin  kˆ ( 24)

The angular momentum of the ball is:
                                   2       v            
                              H  I  mR 2  ˆj  s kˆ                                 ( 25)
                                      5      R            

The rate of change of the angular momentum, relative to the frame is:

                                             a  ˆ               
                                                     j    s kˆ 
                                     2                                                      ( 26)
                             H rel  mR 2 
                                     5       R                      

where s is the English spin-down rate of the ball. Note that there is no x component
in this equation because I assuming for now that no masse spin develops.
The rate of change of angular momentum due to rotation of the frame is:
                                       2
                                       H  mRv t iˆ                                   ( 27)
                                            5

The equation of motion for the ball's rotation, relative to the rotating frame is:
                                  d             
                                 M  H  H rel    H
                                                                                         ( 28)
                                    dt
where the vectors are given by Equations 24, 26, and 27.

The y component of Equation 28 is the same as Equation 6, which implies the roll
deceleration rate is not affected by the sidespin.

The z component of Equation 28 is similar to Equation 18, and it can be used to find
the English spin-down rate for the moving ball.

The x component of Equation 28 can be used to calculate the predicted ball "turn"
rate:
                           Ts sin    Ft R cos  
                                                                2
                                                                  mRv t                 ( 29)
                                                                5
Using Equation 23, we can now solve for the ball turn rate:

                                             Ts sin  
                                t 
                                             2          
                                          mvR  cos                                 ( 30)
                                             5          

If masse spin were included in the analysis, Equation 30 would become:

                                    Ts sin    mR 2 m
                                                 2
                               t               5                                       ( 31)
                                            2         
                                     mvR  cos 
                                            5         

where αm is the rate of change of masse spin. From this equation, if masse spin
develops and later degrades (i.e. α m would change sign and magnitude), the ball could
turn in either direction or go straight (i.e., Ωt could be positive, negative, and even zero
during the motion), depending upon the relative magnitude of the masse and
spin-down-torque terms in the numerator. As described above (below Equation 19),
we will assume no masse spin develops.

Returning to Equation 30, the ball turn rate is a function of ball speed:

                                           1            Ts sin( θ)                      ( 32)
                        Ωt( v )                   
                                     2                 m v  R
                                       cos( θ)
                                     5         
From Equation 2, the ball's deceleration rate is:
                                                        a  μr g                                                          ( 33)

For an initial velocity vo , the velocity of the ball as a function of time is:

                                                   
                                        v v o t  v o  a t                                                             ( 34)

and the time to reach a certain distance is:

                                                                       2
                                                        vo        v o  2  a x
                                   
                                  t v o x                         a
                                                                                                                            ( 35)

Therefore, the amount of ball turn for a shot with initial speed vo and travel distance
L is:
                                               
                                                         
                                                         t vo L  
                                   
                                 θt v o L  
                                               
                                                                           
                                                                       Ωt v v o t dt                                    ( 36)
                                                        0

and the shot error (lateral distance from the target) would be:
                                                               L
                                                    
                                                   
                                       E v o L   θt v o x dx
                                                    
                                                                                                                          ( 37)
                                                               0

Here are some example numbers for a long, slow shot (worst case) and a faster,
shorter shot:

                v o  2  mph                                 L  8ft                                     
                                                                                                      t v o L  3.339 s

                                  
                     θt v o L  0.305  deg                                                    
                                                                                 E v o L  0.217  in

                v o  5  mph                                 L  3ft                                     
                                                                                                      t v o L  0.413 s

                                                                                                             3
                                      
                           θt v o L  0.012  deg                                     
                                                                           E v o L  3.811  10                  in

Obviously, the "ball turn" effect is very small, as is expected from
observations (e.g., NV B.7), but the physics does seem to suggest that a slow
rolling ball with sidespin might tend to turn a slight amount in the direction
of the spin (e.g., right spin causes turn to the right).
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_30_outside_vs_inside_spin_margins_for_error.pdf
title: TP B.30 - Outside vs. Inside Spin Margins for Error
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                         technical proof

                                               TP B.30
                             Outside vs. Inside Spin Margins for Error
                                                     supporting:
                                 “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                          http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                  by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                            originally posted: 10/28/2024            last revision: 10/29/2024

                                                                                     throw
                                                                                                  target
                                                                                                  line

                                                                                                  2R
                                                                                                        
                                                                           º  
                                          d

                                                                                           d

         ball radius in m:                     shot distances in m:                                 assumed CB angle error:
                     1.125 in                          1  ft                    6  ft
            R :=                           d short :=                 d long :=                            Δφ := 2  deg
                        m                                m                         m

 From the triangle above, using the Law of Sines:

                                                  sin( 180  deg  φ)             sin( φ  θ)
                                                                              =
                                                                 d                     2R

Solving for the shot angle for a given shot distance d and cut angle φ gives:

                                                θ( φ , d ) := φ  asin            sin( φ) 
                                                                              2R
                                                                            d               
From TP A.14, throw is calculated with the following, where speeds are in units of m/s:

                                                          a   9.951  10 3 
                                                          b  :=
                                                                     0.108                                                        c v
                                                                                                           μ ( v) := a + b  e
                                                           
                                                           c                    
                                                                      1.088      

                               (               )  (v sin( ϕ)  R ωz) + ( R ωx cos(ϕ) )
                                                                              2                             2
                           vrel v , ωx , ωz , ϕ :=

                                             μ ( vrel( v , ωx , ωz , ϕ) ) v cos( ϕ) 1                         
                                            min                                      ,   ( v sin( ϕ)  R ωz) 
                                                       vrel ( v , ωx , ωz , ϕ)        7                          
           θthrow( v , ωx , ωz , ϕ) := atan
                                                                                          
                                                                                                                   
                                                                          v cos( ϕ)                              

From http://billiards.colostate.edu/faq/speed/typical/, a typical range of shot speeds, converted to m/s is:

                                        1  mph                                           7  mph
                            vslow :=               = 0.447                 vfast :=                     = 3.129
                                           m                                                m
                                           s                                                s
From TP A.25, percentage spin (PS) is related to spin rate ω (rad/sec) with:

                                                                          5 v
                                                         ω( v , PS ) :=      PS
                                                                          4 R

 A slight error in CB direction (Δφ) can create a slightly full or slightly thin hit, relative to the ideal aim:

                                                    Δφ                                   Δφ
                                        φfull = φ                           φthin = φ +
                                                     2                                    2

 Taking throw into account, this will result in the following OB direction angles:

                           θthin φ , d , v , ωx , ωz := θ φ +
                                                                Δφ 
                                                                   , d  + θthrow v , ωx , ωz , φ +
                                                                                                      Δφ 
                                   (                 )          2               
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                       2 

                           θfull φ , d , v , ωx , ωz := θ φ 
                                                                Δφ 
                                                                   , d  + θthrow v , ωx , ωz , φ 
                                                                                                      Δφ 
                                   (                 )          2               
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                       2 

 And the total OB angle error (Δθ) for a given CB angle error (Δφ) can be found with:

                                (                  )             (                    )             (
                            Δθ φ , d , v , ωx , ωz := θthin φ , d , v , ωx , ωz  θfull φ , d , v , ωx , ωz            )
Now let's look at how OB angle error varies with cut angle and percentage spin for a given CB angle error:
                                                                          Δφ = 2  deg

                  short, slow, stun shot with different cut angles for different amount of outside spin:
                                                    d := d short          v := vslow             PS := 0  % , 1  % .. 100%

                                                                2.4

                     Δθ ( 0 deg , d , v , 0 , ω( v , PS) ) 2.2
                                     deg

                     Δθ ( 30 deg , d , v , 0 , ω( v , PS ) )
                                      deg                        2

                     Δθ ( 60 deg , d , v , 0 , ω( v , PS ) )
                                      deg
                                                                1.8

                                                                1.6

                                                                      0   20                40           60              80         100
                                                                                                 PS
                                                                                                 %

                   short, slow, stun shot with different cut angles for different amount of inside spin:
                                                    d := d short               v := vslow             PS := 0  % , 1  % .. 100%

                                                                2.4

                   Δθ ( 0 deg , d , v , 0 ,  ω( v , PS ) ) 2.2
                                     deg

                   Δθ ( 30 deg , d , v , 0 ,  ω( v , PS) )
                                     deg                          2

                   Δθ ( 60 deg , d , v , 0 ,  ω( v , PS) )
                                     deg
                                                                1.8

                                                                1.6

                                                                      0   20                40           60              80         100
                                                                                                 PS
                                                                                                 %
short, slow, stun shot with different amount of outside spin for different cut angles:

                                        d := d short      v := vslow                φ := 0  deg , 1  deg .. 90deg

                                            2.4

     Δθ ( φ , d , v , 0 , ω( v , 0) )       2.2
                  deg

     Δθ ( φ , d , v , 0 , ω( v , 50%) )
                    deg                       2

     Δθ ( φ , d , v , 0 , ω( v , 100%) )
                     deg
                                            1.8

                                            1.6

                                                  0       20           40                    60                 80
                                                                            φ
                                                                            deg

short, slow, stun shot with different amount of inside spin for different cut angles:

                                        d := d short      v := vslow                φ := 0  deg , 1  deg .. 90deg

                                              2.4

     Δθ ( φ , d , v , 0 ,  ω( v , 0 %) ) 2.2
                      deg

     Δθ ( φ , d , v , 0 ,  ω( v , 50%) )
                      deg                         2

     Δθ ( φ , d , v , 0 ,  ω( v , 100%) )
                       deg
                                              1.8

                                              1.6

                                                      0    20           40                      60                    80
                                                                                φ
                                                                             deg
slow, 1/2-ball-hit, shot with different shot distances and speeds for different amount of outside spin:
                                     φ := 30 deg                            PS := 0  % , 1  % .. 100%

                                                         2.4

          (
       Δθ φ , dshort , vslow , 0 , ω( v , PS)        )
                         deg
                                                         2.2
          (
       Δθ φ , dlong , vslow , 0 , ω( v , PS )    )
                         deg

          (
       Δθ φ , dshort , vfast , 0 , ω( v , PS )   )               2

                         deg

          (
       Δθ φ , dlong , vfast , 0 , ω( v , PS)   ) 1.8
                        deg

                                                         1.6

                                                                     0        20              40                60    80    100
                                                                                                      PS
                                                                                                      %

slow, 1/2-ball-hit, shot with different shot distances and speeds for different amount of inside spin:
                                     φ := 30 deg                            PS := 0  % , 1  % .. 100%

                                                                 2.4

          (
       Δθ φ , dshort , vslow , 0 ,  ω( v , PS )             )
                           deg
                                                                 2.2
          (
       Δθ φ , dlong , vslow , 0 ,  ω( v , PS)           )
                          deg

          (
       Δθ φ , dshort , vfast , 0 ,  ω( v , PS)          )           2

                          deg

          (
       Δθ φ , dlong , vfast , 0 ,  ω( v , PS )      ) 1.8
                         deg

                                                                 1.6

                                                                         0      20              40               60    80    100
                                                                                                           PS
                                                                                                           %
Observations about and conclusions from the analysis:

    - For background and advice concerning the use of outside and inside spin, see these resource
      pages:
       billiards.colostate.edu/faq/sidespin/outside-gearing
       billiards.colostate.edu/faq/sidespin/inside/

    - This analysis assumed that CB deflection is being corrected for based on shot speed and distance
      and on the amount of sidespin being used. Not everybody will be as good at this as others. For
      more info and advice, see:
       billiards.colostate.edu/faq/sidespin/aim/compensation/

    - For some (but not all) cut angles and some spin amounts, outside spin reduces OB angle
      error (i.e., there is more room for error) than no spin, but this is certainly not true over a full range
      of angles and spins.

    - Inside spin generally reduces OB angle error (i.e., there is more room for CB angle error)
      and makes it more consistent, as compared to outside spin.

    - The amount of OB angle error varies a lot with the amount of spin when using outside spin.
      This is not the case with inside spin.

    - Faster speed (assuming you can remain accurate with your stroke at faster speed) reduces the
      OB angle error (i.e., there is more room for CB angle error).

    - OB angle error is obviously larger with longer distance shots (i.e., there is less room for
      CB angle error).
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_31_percentage_inside_spin_required_for_maximum_cit_at_any_cut_angle.pdf
title: TP B.31 - Percentage Sidespin Required for Maximum CIT at Any Cut Angle
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                             technical proof

                                   TP B.31
     Percentage Sidespin Required for Maximum CIT at Any Cut Angle
                                                      supporting:
                                  “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                             https://drdavepoolinfo.com/
                                   by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                             originally posted: 3/5/2025      last revision: 3/5/2025

From TP A.14, throw is calculated with the following, where speeds are in units of m/s:

                                                         a   9.951  10- 3 
                              1.125 in                  b  :=
                       R :=                                         0.108                                                 - c v
                                  m                                                                 μ ( v) := a + b  e
                                                        c                   
                                                                     1.088      

                                   (             )   (v sin( ϕ) - R ωz) + ( R ωx cos(ϕ) )
                                                                                2                     2
                              vrel v , ωx , ωz , ϕ :=

                                                μ ( vrel( v , ωx , ωz , ϕ) ) v cos( ϕ) 1                         
                                               min                                      ,   ( v sin( ϕ) - R ωz) 
                                                          vrel ( v , ωx , ωz , ϕ)        7                          
              θthrow( v , ωx , ωz , ϕ) := atan
                                                                                             
                                                                                                                      
                                                                             v cos( ϕ)                              

From https://drdavepoolinfo.com/faq/speed/typical/, a typical range of CB speeds, converted to m/s is:

                       1  mph                                          3  mph                                              7  mph
         vslow :=                = 0.447                vmedium :=                  = 1.341                    vfast :=                = 3.129
                         m                                                  m                                                      m
                         s                                                  s                                                      s

From TP A.25, percentage spin (PS) is related to spin rate ω (rad/sec) with:

                                                                            5 v
                                                           ω( v , PS ) :=      PS
                                                                            4 R

For a slow stun shot, where cut-induced throw (CIT) is maximum, CIT for a given percentage of inside
spin (PS) is:

                                             θCIT( v , PS , ϕ) := θthrow( v , 0 , -ω( v , PS ) , ϕ)
Here is how cut-induced throw (CIT) varies with percentage inside spin (PS) for slow and fast shots:
                                                                      PS := 0 , .05 .. 1

              small cut angle:                         ϕ := 15 deg

                                               6

                                               4
                      (
              θ CIT vslow , PS , ϕ         )
                           deg

                      (
              θ CIT vfast , PS , ϕ     )
                          deg
                                               2

                                               0
                                                   0            20        40                60    80    100
                                                                                   PS
                                                                                   %

              large cut angle:                         ϕ := 60 deg

                                           6

                                           4
                  (
            θ CIT vslow , PS , ϕ       )
                          deg

                  (
            θ CIT vfast , PS , ϕ   )
                      deg
                                           2

                                           0
                                               0               20        40                60    80    100
                                                                                 PS
                                                                                 %
     Now finding the percentage inside spin that results in the maximum cut-induced throw for a range of cut angles:

                                                                                                  T
                            ϕA := ( 0  deg 15 deg 30 deg 45 deg 60 deg 75 deg 85 deg )                 PS := 0.95
                                                                                                              initial guess
v := vslow

               i := 0      ϕ := ϕA
                                  i
                                             θCIT( PS ) := θthrow( v , 0 , -ω( v , PS ) , ϕ)                        (
                                                                                                  PIS := Maximize θCIT , PS
                                                                                                      i                       )

               i := 1      ϕ := ϕA
                                  i
                                             θCIT( PS ) := θthrow( v , 0 , -ω( v , PS ) , ϕ)                        (
                                                                                                  PIS := Maximize θCIT , PS
                                                                                                      i                       )

               i := 2      ϕ := ϕA
                                  i
                                             θCIT( PS ) := θthrow( v , 0 , -ω( v , PS ) , ϕ)                        (
                                                                                                  PIS := Maximize θCIT , PS
                                                                                                      i                       )

               i := 3      ϕ := ϕA
                                  i
                                             θCIT( PS ) := θthrow( v , 0 , -ω( v , PS ) , ϕ)                        (
                                                                                                  PIS := Maximize θCIT , PS
                                                                                                      i                       )

               i := 4      ϕ := ϕA
                                  i
                                             θCIT( PS ) := θthrow( v , 0 , -ω( v , PS ) , ϕ)                        (
                                                                                                  PIS := Maximize θCIT , PS
                                                                                                      i                       )

               i := 5      ϕ := ϕA
                                  i
                                             θCIT( PS ) := θthrow( v , 0 , -ω( v , PS ) , ϕ)                        (
                                                                                                  PIS := Maximize θCIT , PS
                                                                                                      i                       )

               i := 6      ϕ := ϕA
                                  i
                                             θCIT( PS ) := θthrow( v , 0 , -ω( v , PS ) , ϕ)                        (
                                                                                                  PIS := Maximize θCIT , PS
                                                                                                      i                       )
 PISslow := PIS

  v := vfast

                  i := 0     ϕ := ϕA
                                      i
                                                θCIT( PS ) := θthrow( v , 0 , -ω( v , PS ) , ϕ)                         (
                                                                                                      PIS := Maximize θCIT , PS
                                                                                                          i                       )

                  i := 1     ϕ := ϕA
                                      i
                                                θCIT( PS ) := θthrow( v , 0 , -ω( v , PS ) , ϕ)                         (
                                                                                                      PIS := Maximize θCIT , PS
                                                                                                          i                       )

                  i := 2     ϕ := ϕA
                                      i
                                                θCIT( PS ) := θthrow( v , 0 , -ω( v , PS ) , ϕ)                         (
                                                                                                      PIS := Maximize θCIT , PS
                                                                                                          i                       )

                  i := 3     ϕ := ϕA
                                      i
                                                θCIT( PS ) := θthrow( v , 0 , -ω( v , PS ) , ϕ)                         (
                                                                                                      PIS := Maximize θCIT , PS
                                                                                                          i                       )

                  i := 4     ϕ := ϕA
                                      i
                                                θCIT( PS ) := θthrow( v , 0 , -ω( v , PS ) , ϕ)                         (
                                                                                                      PIS := Maximize θCIT , PS
                                                                                                          i                       )

                  i := 5     ϕ := ϕA
                                      i
                                                θCIT( PS ) := θthrow( v , 0 , -ω( v , PS ) , ϕ)                         (
                                                                                                      PIS := Maximize θCIT , PS
                                                                                                          i                       )

                  i := 6     ϕ := ϕA
                                      i
                                                θCIT( PS ) := θthrow( v , 0 , -ω( v , PS ) , ϕ)                         (
                                                                                                      PIS := Maximize θCIT , PS
                                                                                                          i                       )
    PISfast := PIS
  Here is how the percentage of inside spin (PIS) required for maximum cut-induced throw (CIT)
  varies with cut angle (ϕA) for both slow and fast shots:

                                           100

                                           50

                           PIS slow

                              %
                                            0
                           PIS fast

                             %

                                       - 50

                                      - 100
                                                 0        20               40                60                    80
                                                                                ϕA
                                                                                deg

     And here's how much throw you can get at each of those angles (for the given CB speed):
                                                     θCIT( v , PS , ϕ) := θthrow( v , 0 , -ω( v , PS ) , ϕ)

                                             7

                                             6

               (
         θ CIT vslow , PIS slow , ϕA       )5
                      deg

               (
         θ CIT vfast , PIS fast , ϕA   )
                     deg                     4

                                             3

                                             2
                                                 0       20               40               60                 80
                                                                               ϕA
                                                                               deg

With a very small cut-angle shot, only about 50% of maximum inside spin is required to get maximum
cut-induced throw (CIT) at slow speed. For large cut angles, outside spin is required for maximum CIT (with
larger amounts of outside spin required at larger angles), and more throw is possible (for a given CB speed).
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_3_throw_calibration_and_contour_plots_for_various_cut_angles_speeds_english_and_roll.pdf
title: TP B.3 - Throw Calibration and Contour Plots for Various
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                                    technical proof
                                                    TP B.3
                                Throw Calibration and Contour Plots for Various
                                     Cut Angles, Speeds, English, and Roll
                                                               supporting:
                                             “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                                            http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                              by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                                    originally posted: 7/8/2008                  last revision: 8/27/2008

                                               Created at the request of Colin Colenso

Equations from throw analysis (TP A.14):

           1.125  in
    R 
                 m
                                                                 
                                            v rel v ωx ωz ϕ        v sin(ϕ)  R ωz2  R ωx cos( ϕ) 2

                                                            c vrel  v ω x ω z ϕ                  
                                                  a  b e                                  v  cos( ϕ) 1
                                                                                                              v  sin( ϕ)  R ωz
                                             min
                                                              v rel v ωx ωz ϕ                       7
                                                                                                             
    θthrow                             
                v ω ω ϕ a b c 
                     x    z                                                              v  cos( ϕ)
                                                                                                                                        36

                                                                                       5 v
                                                                      ω( v PE)        PE
                                                                                       4 R

 Definitions:
                     x, r: vertical plane roll rate (follow or draw)                             z, e : English spin rate

                         PEr: % roll (follow or draw)                                     PEe : % English (side spin)

                     outside English (OE): e , PE e > 0                              inside English (IE): e , PE e < 0

 Speed scale:
                                                            km                               m
                          soft:                v 1  4                     v 1  1.111                v 1  2.485  mph
                                                            hr                               s
                                                            km                               m
                     medium-soft:              v 2  8                    v 2  2.222                v 2  4.971  mph
                                                            hr                               s
                                                            km                               m
                         medium:               v 3  12                    v 3  3.333                v 3  7.456  mph
                                                             hr                              s
                                                            km                               m
                          firm:                v 4  20                    v 4  5.556                v 4  12.427 mph
                                                             hr                              s
                                                            km                           m
                          power:               v 5  36                    v 5  10                   v 5  22.369 mph
                                                             hr                          s
    Convert speeds to unitless m/s numbers:

                 v1                    v2                            v3                          v4                              v5
        v 1                v 2                          v 3                    v 4                              v 5 
                 m                     m                                 m                       m                                m
                 s                      s                                s                       s                                s

                         Calibration data (from experiment by Colin Colenso):

    measured throw values (at speeds: 1, 2, 3):

                                                                                    30 deg 
                                            cut angles:                      φm           
                                                                                     
                                                                                     45 deg      

                                       4.8                                                    3.5                                                  3 
                                θ1                                                   θ2                                                  θ3       
in inches per yard:                     5.6                                                    3                                                    2.3

                           θ1   7.685                                         θ2   5.588                                             θ3   4.786 
 in degrees:          tan              deg                              tan             deg                                   tan            deg
                           36   8.985                                         36   4.786                                             36   3.666 

     sum of squares of errors in calibration data:
                                                                                                                        2
                             SSE ( a b c)   θthrow v 1 0 0 φm a b c  θ1  
                                                                                       0                        0
                                                                                                                            2
                                                          θthrow v 2 0 0 φm a b c  θ2  
                                                                                           0                      0
                                                                                                                            2
                                                          θthrow v 3 0 0 φm a b c  θ3  
                                                                                  0                0
                                                                                                         2
                                                          θthrow v 1 0 0 φm a b c  θ1  
                                                                                  1                1
                                                                                                         2
                                                          θthrow v 2 0 0 φm a b c  θ2  
                                                                                  1                1
                                                                                                         2
                                                          θthrow v 3 0 0 φm a b c  θ3 
                                                                                  1                1

       initial guesses for friction equation parameters:                             a  0.01           b  0.1                c  1

       find best fit of friction model to calibration data:

                             a                                    0.016 
                              b   Minimize( SSE a b c)   0.219 
                                                                        
                             c                                    0.691 

 Throw equation in units of inches/yard:

                                                                   c vrel v ω x ω z ϕ                    
                                                         a  b e                                 v  cos( ϕ)  1  v  sin( ϕ)  R ω
                                                    min
                                                                     v rel v ωx ωz ϕ                        7
                                                                                                                                           z
                                                                                                                     
                      θthrow      v ω ω ϕ 
                                        x       z                                                               v  cos( ϕ)
                                                                                                                                                36
Plot of calibration data along with fit model:

                                           PEr  0%           PEe  0%

              4.8                   3.5                      3 
       θ1                  θ2                      θ3                        30 deg 
              5.6                    3                        2.3           φm           
                                                                                           
                                                                                          45 deg     

                                                                           ϕ  0  deg 1  deg  75 deg

                                                   6

                                                   4

  θ1

  θ2                                               2

  θ3

                          
  θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ 0 
  θthrow v2 ω  v2 PEr ω  v2 PEe ϕ

  θthrow v3 ω  v3 PEr ω  v3 PEe ϕ 2

                                                  4

                                                  6
                                                       0             15           30                 45        60   75
                                                                                 φm φm φm ϕ
                                                                                        
                                                                                 deg deg deg deg
Plot other test data along with fit model:

                                                                                          50% 
        PEr  0%                  PEe  100  % 99%  100  %              PEm        
                                                                                          50%        

        ϕ  30 deg                        4.3                       1.7                                0.6 
                                     θ1                      θ3                               θ5       
                                             
                                             .5                         
                                                                         .1                                .8 

                                                       5
   θ1

   θ3

   θ5

                           
   θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ 0 
   θthrow v3 ω  v3 PEr ω  v3 PEe ϕ

   θthrow v5 ω  v5 PEr ω  v5 PEe ϕ

                                                     5

                                                      100          50                       0                   50       100
                                                                                  PEm PEm PEm PEe
                                                                                           
                                                                                   %    %    %    %

          ϕ  45 deg                        3.9                      1                                  .5 
                                       θ1                      θ3                              θ5   
                                                 
                                               2.3                        1.4                                 
                                                                                                               .9

                                                           5
     θ1

     θ3

     θ5

                             
     θthrow v1 ω v1 PEr ω v1 PEe ϕ 0 
     θthrow v3 ω  v3 PEr ω  v3 PEe ϕ

     θthrow v5 ω  v5 PEr ω  v5 PEe ϕ

                                                      5

                                                        100            50                       0                   50    100
                                                                                   PEm PEm PEm PEe
                                                                                            
                                                                                    %    %    %    %
           Generate contour plots of how throw varies with %English and %spin (top or bottom):
                                               rectangular grid of %English and %spin:
     i  1  41   PEe  100 %  ( i  1 )  5 %      PEe  100  % PEe  95 %                      PEe  95 %   PEe  100  %
                       i                                    1              2                                 40            41
     j  1  21   PEr  0%  ( j  1 )  5 %          PEr  0  %    PEr  5  %                       PEr  95 %   PEr  100  %
                       j                                    1              2                                20            21

NOTE - The figure below shows how all of the following contour plots should be interpreted:

                                                      top/bottom spin
                                                                                max possible topspin
                               cue
                               ball

                                                                                                         contour
                        stun                                                                               plot

                                                                                                            English
                      max
                     inside
                     English
                                                                                                            max
                                                                                                           outside
                                                                                                           English
                           micue
                            limit
                                                                                max possible bottom-spin

                               contour plot color legend (ROYGBIV):
                                 red (max throw to right of line-of-centers), orange, yellow,
                                 green (very little or no throw),
                                 blue, indigo, violet (max throw to left of line-of-centers)

 NOTE - The diagram above illustrates tip contact positions on the ball, but be aware that the throw values
 correspond to the spin on the CB at OB contact. Spin changes due to drag on the cloth, as the CB
 approaches the OB, must be taken into account. For example, the "maximum possible bottom-spin" point at
 the bottom is possible only for a firm shot over a short distance; otherwise, drag action reduces the bottom
 spin some, in which case the effective point on the diagram would be a little higher.

      program to convert grid of calculated throw values to contour plot with fixed color range:
                                      M_to_P( M max_throw)    for i  1  41
                                                                      for j  1  21
                                                                           P                M
                                                                            i 1 j  19        i j
                                                                           P                M
                                                                            i 1 21 j         i j
                                max_throw  5.7
                                                                  P         max_throw
                                                                   0 0
                                                                  P             max_throw
                                                                   40 40
                                                                  P
                                                        full-ball hit (no cut):
                                                             φ  0.00001  deg

v  v 1    M            θthrow v ω v PEr  ω v PEe  φ
                i j                                                              P  M_to_P( M max_throw)
                                                     j           i    

                                                                                     max( M )  4.5

                                                                                     min( M )  4.5

                               P

 v  v 2   M               θthrow v ω v PEr  ω v PEe  φ
                   i j                                                            P  M_to_P( M max_throw)
                                                      j           i       

                                                                                       max( M )  3.308

                                                                                       min( M )  3.308

                                   P
v  v 3    M            θthrow v ω v PEr  ω v PEe  φ
                i j                                                              P  M_to_P( M max_throw)
                                                     j           i    

                                                                                     max( M )  2.723

                                                                                     min( M )  2.723

                               P
 v  v 4   M               θthrow v ω v PEr  ω v PEe  φ
                   i j                                                            P  M_to_P( M max_throw)
                                                      j           i       

                                                                                       max( M )  2.036

                                                                                       min( M )  2.036

                                   P

 v  v 5   M               θthrow v ω v PEr  ω v PEe  φ
                   i j                                                             P  M_to_P( M max_throw)
                                                      j           i       

                                                                                        max( M )  1.476

                                                                                        min( M )  1.476

                                   P
                                                     1/2-ball hit (medium cut):
                                                                φ  30 deg

v  v 1    M            θthrow v ω v PEr  ω v PEe  φ
                i j                                                               P  M_to_P( M max_throw)
                                                    j             i    

                                                                                      max( M )  4.789

                                                                                      min( M )  4.454

                                 P

 v  v 2   M               θthrow v ω v PEr  ω v PEe  φ
                   i j                                                             P  M_to_P( M max_throw)
                                                     j             i       

                                                                                        max( M )  3.584

                                                                                        min( M )  3.584

                                 P
v  v 3    M            θthrow v ω v PEr  ω v PEe  φ
                i j                                                              P  M_to_P( M max_throw)
                                                     j           i    

                                                                                     max( M )  2.969

                                                                                     min( M )  2.969

                               P
 v  v 4   M               θthrow v ω v PEr  ω v PEe  φ          P  M_to_P( M max_throw)
                   i j                              j           i       

                                                                                       max( M )  2.227

                                                                                       min( M )  2.227

                                   P
 v  v 5   M               θthrow v ω v PEr  ω v PEe  φ           P  M_to_P( M max_throw)
                   i j                              j           i       

                                                                                        max( M )  1.485

                                                                                        min( M )  1.485

                                   P
                                                       1/8-ball hit (thin cut):
                                                              φ  61.045 deg

v  v 1    M            θthrow v ω v PEr  ω v PEe  φ
                i j                                                                P  M_to_P( M max_throw)
                                                      j            i    

                                                                                       max( M )  5.682

                                                                                       min( M )  3.984

                               P

 v  v 2   M               θthrow v ω v PEr  ω v PEe  φ               P  M_to_P( M max_throw)
                   i j                               j            i       

                                                                                           max( M )  4.591

                                                                                           min( M )  3.984

                                   P
v  v 3    M            θthrow v ω v PEr  ω v PEe  φ
                i j                                                              P  M_to_P( M max_throw)
                                                     j           i    

                                                                                       max( M )  3.888

                                                                                       min( M )  3.888

                               P
 v  v 4   M               θthrow v ω v PEr  ω v PEe  φ          P  M_to_P( M max_throw)
                   i j                              j           i       

                                                                                       max( M )  2.94

                                                                                       min( M )  2.94

                                   P
 v  v 5   M               θthrow v ω v PEr  ω v PEe  φ           P  M_to_P( M max_throw)
                   i j                              j           i       

                                                                                        max( M )  1.992

                                                                                        min( M )  1.992

                                   P
Write a dataset to a file for plotting outside of MathCAD:

     φ  61.045 deg                  v  v 5

     M            θthrow v ω v PEr  ω v PEe  φ
         i j                                   j          i   
                      PEe                          PEr
                          i                           j
     M                          M                            row and column headings
         i 0         %              0 j             %

     WRITEPRN ( "data/eigth-5.txt" )  M
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_4_stroke_speed_and_acceleration_vs_distance.pdf
title: TP B.4 - Stroke speed and acceleration vs. distance
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                                technical proof
                                               TP B.4
                              Stroke speed and acceleration vs. distance
                                                     supporting:
                                   “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                                     http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                    by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                           originally posted: 11/3/2008               last revision: 2/10/2009

                         stroke length to CB:                 d  12 in                 d  0.305 m
                                                                                                            m
                      cue speed at CB impact:                 v f  15 mph              v f  6.706
                                                                                                            s
                                       cue mass:              mc  19 oz                mc  0.539 kg

            Kinematic/dynamic relationships:
                                         dv           dv dx      dv
                                   a=            =         = v             cue acceleration
                                         dt           dx dt      dx

                                                              dv
                                     F = mc a = mc v                      force on cue
                                                              dx

Classic "coast into the ball" pendulum (p) stroke (assuming a classic 1/4-wave sinusoidal speed
vs. distance curve):
                   v p ( x )  v f  sin  
                                           x π
                                           d 2                                             2
                                                                                          vf π
                                                       cos                                   sin x
                                                  π          x π                                            π
                          ap = v p ( x )  v f                             ap ( x ) 
                                                 2 d       d 2                          4 d        d 
                          Fp ( x )  mc ap ( x )

Typical "accelerate into the ball" (a) stroke (assuming a straight-line speed vs. distance curve):
                                      x
                    v a( x )  v f 
                                      d
                                                                               2
                                             vf                          vf 
                           aa = v a( x )                    aa( x )     x
                                             d                          d
                                                                                                       d
                           Fa( x )  mc aa( x )                                          x  0          d
                                                                                                       20
Here are alternative (time-based) formulations of stroke kinematics for
coasting-pendulum vs. accelerating strokes:

Classic "coast into the ball" pendulum (p) stroke (assuming a 1/2-wave sinusoidal speed vs. time
curve):
                                                vf
                                                     1  cos
                                                                    π 
                                                                        t
                                                                   tfp  
                                     v pa( t) =
                                                2
                                                                         
         Integrating gives:
                                                vf         tfp          π 
                                                   t          sin      t 
                                                                        tfp 
                                     x pa( t) =
                                                             π
                                                2
                                                                             

         Evaluating boundary conditions gives:

                                                                               vf         tfp                     
                                                                                              sin      tfp 
                                                                                                        π
                                              x pa tfp = d =                       tfp                                               d  12 in
                                                                                            π
                                                                               2
                                                                                                      tfp
                                                                                                                                     v f  15 mph
                                                                                        2 d
                                                                           tfp                                                        tfp  0.091 s
                                                                                        vf

           Therefore, the resulting velocity curve looks like:

                                         vf                                                                    vf     tfp          π 
                                                1  cos                t                                          sin
                                                                       π
                           v pa( t)                                                            x pa( t)      t                 t 
                                                                                                                        π          tfp 
                                         2
                                                                 tfp                                       2
                                                                                                                                              
                                               tfp
                            tp  0  sec 
                                                  20
                                                         tfp                              
                                                                                      v pa tfp  15 mph                            
                                                                                                                                x pa tfp  12 in

                  15                                                                                          15

              10
         vpa tp                                                                                         10
                                                                                                  vpa tp

          mph                                                                                       mph
                   5                                                                                           5

                   0                                                                                           0
                       0       0.02 0.04           0.06 0.08                                                       0                5            10
                                             tp                                                                                    xpa tp 
                                                                                                                                        in

             Differentiating the velocity equation gives us acceleration and force:

                                          π v f
                                                        sin          t
                                                                 π
                            apa( t)                                                          Fpa( t)  mc apa( t)
                                          2  tfp
                                                                tfp
                                                                           
 Typical "accelerate into the ball" (a) stroke (assuming a 1/4-wave sinusoidal acceleration vs.
 time curve):
                                        aaa ( t) = af  sin
                                                                π 
                                                                      t
                                                             2  tfa 
           Integrating gives:

                                                                                                                                       2
                                             2  af  tfa                                                             4  af  tfa
                                                               cos
                                                                       π 
                                                                                                                                            sin              t
                                                                                                                                                       π
                    v aa ( t) = v f                                         t            x aa ( t) = v f  t 
                                                    π
                                                                     2 tfa                                              π
                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                    2  tfa
                                                                                                                                                                 

           Evaluating boundary conditions gives:

                          2  af  tfa
                                          cos              0                                         2  v f  tfa
                                                        π
                                                                                                                            sin            t 
v aa ( 0 ) = 0 = v f 
                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                           π
                                                                             x aa tfa = d = v f  tfa                                                           d  12 in
                                                                                                                                       2  tfa fa
                               π                   2  tfa
                                                                                                                π
                                                                                                                                                               v f  15 mph
                              π v f                                                                              d
                    af =                                                                        tfa 
                              2  tfa                                                                                                                          tfa  0.125 s
                                                                                                         v f   1 
                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                        π

             Therefore, the resulting velocity curve looks like:

                                                                                                                               2  v f  tfa
                     v aa ( t)  v f   1  cos                          t                                                              sin                t
                                                                       π                                                                                        π
                                                                                                  x aa ( t)  v f  t 
                                                                   2  tfa                                                             π                    2  tfa
                                                                                                                                                                    

                                                              tfa
                                        ta  0  sec 
                                                              20
                                                                        tfa                  
                                                                                          x aa tfa  12 in                             
                                                                                                                             v aa tfa  15 mph

                    15                                                                                   15

                 10
           vaa ta                                                                                     10
                                                                                               vaa ta

             mph                                                                                 mph
                      5                                                                                   5

                      0                                                                                   0
                          0               0.05                  0.1                                           0                    5                        10
                                                   ta                                                                              xaa ta   
                                                                                                                                           in

                 Differentiating the velocity equation gives us acceleration and force:

                                                 π v f
                                                             sin               t
                                                                         π
                              aaa ( t)                                                    Faa ( t)  mc aaa ( t)
                                                 2  tfa               2  tfa
                                                                                  
Here's yet another alternative formulation recommended by "Jal" (from the online forums),
who helped me work out some of the details. This time, let's look at a sinusoidal acceleration
profile resulting in the desired speed with the smallest peak force (pf).

The acceleration is assumed to be of the form:
                                                                 F
                                               apf ( t) =                  sin( ω t)
                                                                 mc
where F is the peak force.

Integrating twice gives speed and distance as functions of time:

                                                             F
                                           v pf ( t) =                    ( 1  cos( ω t) )
                                                          mc ω

                                                                 F
                                           x pf ( t) =                        ( ω t  sin( ω t) )
                                                                         2
                                                          mc ω

From these equations, the peak force is related to the final position (d) and speed (v f),
after time t fpf, according to:

                                                             2
                             
                                                         ω                                                ω
                  F ω tfpf = mc d                                                = mc v f 
                                           ω tfpf  sinω tfpf                                       
                                                                                                   1  cos ω tfpf   
Defining z = ωt fpf, and solving for ω in term of z gives:

                                                        v f ( z  sin( z) )
                                           ω( z) =         
                                                        d ( 1  cos( z) )

Substituting this back into the speed peak-force equation gives:

                                                                 2
                                                      mc v f            ( z  sin( z) )
                                          F( z) =                    
                                                         d                                 2
                                                                         ( 1  cos( z) )

To get the desired final speed (vf) over the stroke length (d) with the minimum peak force,

                                                    d ( z  sin( z) ) 
                                         F( z) = 0 = 
                                      d
                                      dz            dz                 2
                                                        ( 1  cos( z) ) 
giving:
                                      2
                       ( 1  cos( z) )  ( 1  cos( z) )  ( z  sin( z) )  2  ( 1  cos( z) ) sin( z) = 0

                                                  2
                                  ( 1  cos( z) )  2  sin( z)  ( z  sin( z) ) = 0
The solution to this equation is:

                       z  90 deg                                    Given
                                                                                                      2
                    initial guess                                               ( 1  cos( z) )  2  sin( z)  ( z  sin( z) ) = 0
                                                                        z  Find( z)  113.145  deg
                                                                           2
                          verifying:               ( 1  cos( z) )  2  sin( z)  ( z  sin( z) )  0

 so, from the equations for ω, z, and F above,

                                                    v f ( z  sin( z) )          rad
                                            ω                         16.665
                                                    d ( 1  cos( z) )            sec

                                                          z
                                            tfpf             0.118 s
                                                         ω
                                                              2
                                                 mc v f              ( z  sin( z) )
                                          F                                               9.714 lbf
                                                      d                                 2
                                                                      ( 1  cos( z) )

 Giving:

                               F                                                                            F
           x pf ( t)                  ( ω t  sin( ω t) )                                apf ( t)          sin( ω t)
                                   2                                                                        mc
                          mc ω

                               F
               v pf ( t)              ( 1  cos( ω t) )                                   Fpf ( t)  mc apf ( t)
                              mc ω
                                                                                tfpf
                                                         tpf  0  sec                tfpf
                                                                                 20

          15                                                                                   15

     10
vpf tpf                                                                          vpf tpf  10
 mph                                                                                mph
           5                                                                                      5

           0                                                                                      0
               0              0.05                 0.1                                                0           5             10
                                tpf                                                                                    
                                                                                                                 xpf tpf

                                                                                                                      in
               Now comparing the results from all of the models:

          p: pendulum (1/4-wave sinusoidal v vs. x)
          a: accelerating (straight-line v vs. x)
          pa: pendulum - alternative (1/2-wave sinusoidal v vs. t)
          aa: accelerating - alternative (1/4-wave sinusoidal a vs. t)
          pf: accelerating - alternative (minimum peak force)

                                                 Speed vs. distance:

          15

vp( x)

mph

va( x)    10

mph

    
vpa tp

 mph

    
vaa ta

 mph

     5
vpf tpf

  mph

           0
               0                                           5                              10

                                        x        x               xaa ta xpf  tpf 
                                                          xpa tp
                                                                        
                                       in in                   in        in        in
    Force vs. distance:

           20

           15
F p( x)

 lbf

F a( x)

 lbf

     
F pa tp

  lbf      10

     
F aa ta

  lbf

     
F pf tpf

   lbf

            5

            0
                0                           5                              10

                          x        x              xaa ta xpf  tpf 
                                            xpa tp
                                                         
                          in in                 in        in        in
speed vs. bridge length change:
                                                                                                       d
        x min  0.9 d  10.8 in         x max  1.1 d  13.2 in       x  x min x min             x max
                                                                                                   20

                   t  tfp               Given
                                              x pa( t) = x min
                                          tp_min  Find( t)  0.086 s                            
                                                                                    x pa tp_min  10.8 in

                   t  tfp               Given
                                              x pa( t) = x max
                                          tp_max  Find( t)  0.095 s                            
                                                                                    x pa tp_max  13.2 in

                              tp_max  tp_min
                     Δt                                         tp  tp_min tp_min  Δt  tp_max
                                     20

                   t  tfa               Given
                                              x aa ( t) = x min
                                          ta_min  Find( t)  0.12 s                             
                                                                                    x aa ta_min  10.8 in

                   t  tfa               Given
                                              x aa ( t) = x max
                                          ta_max  Find( t)  0.13 s                             
                                                                                    x aa ta_max  13.2 in

                                  ta_max  ta_min                ta  ta_min ta_min  Δt  ta_max
                          Δt 
                                          20

                     t  tfpf             Given
                                               x pf ( t) = x min
                                           tpf_min  Find( t)  0.114 s                              
                                                                                    x pf tpf_min  10.8 in

                     t  tfpf             Given
                                               x pf ( t) = x max
                                           tpf_max  Find( t)  0.123 s                              
                                                                                    x pf tpf_max  13.2 in

                                  tpf_max  tpf_min              tpf  tpf_min tpf_min  Δt  tpf_max
                          Δt 
                                           20
                            speed vs. bridge or stroke length change:

          17

vp( x)

mph
          16
va( x)

mph

    
vpa tp

 mph      15

    
vaa ta

 mph

     14
vpf tpf

  mph

          13
               11                                             12                   13

                                   x        x             xaa ta xpf  tpf 
                                                     xpa tp
                                                                  
                                   in in               in          in        in

 With typical pendulum (p) strokes, the speed is more constant (i.e., leveled-off) at CB
 impact, possibly making it easier to control shot speed, because the speed is less
 sensitive to variations in bridge and stroke length. With typical "accelerate into the
 ball" (a) strokes, the force increases and levels off during the stroke, and force is
 being applied all of the way up to ball impact. With a classic pendulum stroke, it is
 natural to coast into the ball with no force at impact. The peak force is typically
 lower with an "accelerate into the ball" stroke than with a pendulum stroke (for the
 same shot speed) because force is applied over a larger distance . Therefore, for
 some people, this type of stroke might seem to require less effort for a given speed,
 and higher speeds might be possible. A typical "accelerate into the ball" stroke
 usually involves more of a "piston-like" stroke, with shoulder motion and elbow
 drop, allowing some people to generate force more easily throughout the stroke.
 One disadvantage of a piston stroke is that tip-contact-point accuracy might be more
 difficult to control.

   For actual stroke examples with video demonstrations and plots, see:
           HSV B.40 - stroke speed and acceleration analysis, with Bob Jewett

   For plots and analysis of actual accelerometer readings, see:
            TP A.9 - Cue accelerometer measurements
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_5_rolling_cb_direct_hit_hop_and_ball_travel_distances.pdf
title: TP B.5 - Rolling CB, direct-hit hop and ball travel distances
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
technical proof                                                                                                   technical proof
                                             TP B.5
                      Rolling CB, direct-hit hop and ball travel distances
                                               supporting:
                             “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                            http://billiards.colostate.edu
                              by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                        originally posted: 1/30/2009                            last revision: 1/30/2009

  Typical speeds for a range of shots:
v touch  1.5 mph          v slow  3  mph                      v medium_soft  5  mph               v medium  7  mph

        v medium_fast  8  mph                v fast  12 mph                          v power  20 mph

  Rolling CB with square hit on OB (see details in TP A.5):

              Normal impulse between the balls:
                                              1  eb                       
                                       F' n =         m v
                                                 2

              Tangential impulse between the balls during impact (assuming slip):
                                                        F' t = μb  F' n

              Vertical speed of CB after impact, due to tangential friction force:

                                                1                     
                                                               μb  1  eb  v     
                                    vz =             F' t =
                                                m                           2

              Loss of CB spin, which is the same as the gain in OB spin, due to the tangential
              friction force is:

                                                         1  eb        
                                  F' t R       μb                 m v  R
                                                        2                 = 5 μ  1  e v
                           Δω =
                                    I
                                            =
                                                            2       2           4 R b
                                                                                        b
                                                                    m R
                                                               5

              where:
                                  μb  0.06                        typical COF between the balls
                                  eb  0.94                        typical COR between the balls
CB hop height and time:

          Energy is conserved during the CB hop of height h, so:

                                   1              2
                                                                                    2
                                                                                        
                                                                                 μb  1  eb              2 2
                     m g  h =         m v z                    h ( v )                                  v
                                   2                                                        8g

                     
         h v medium  0.067  in                              
                                                   h v fast  0.196  in                                             
                                                                                                         h v power  0.544  in

          The time required for the entire hop (up and down) is given by:

                                                                                            
                                                                                    μb  1  eb  v           
                       v z = 2g  Δt                                 Δt( v ) 
                                                                                                     g

                             
                    Δt v fast  0.064 s                                    
                                                                        Δt v power  0.106 s

Ball travel distances after impact:
                       μs  0.2                      typical ball-cloth coefficient of sliding friction

                       μr  0.01                     typical ball-cloth coefficient of rolling resistance

                       R  2.25 in                  ball radius

              From TP 4.1, the skid distance and final speed are given by:

                     d skid( v ω)  sign                  ω                 6  v  5v  R ω  ( R ω) 
                                                          v                2                     2                              2
                                                      R            49 μs g

                                                                           5            2
                                                   v skid( v ω)             v              R ω
                                                                           7            7

              The distance required for rolling to stop is:
                                                                                            2
                                                                                        v
                                                          d roll_stop( v ) 
                                                                                    2  μr g

              After impact, the initial CB and OB speeds and spins are (from TP A.5 and above):

                                     1  eb                                                             1  eb 
                    v CB( v )                       v                        v OB( v )                           v
                                          2                                                                   2

                                                         
                             5                                                   v
               Δω( v )            μb  1  eb  v                 ωCB( v )     Δω( v )                               ωOB( v )  Δω( v )
                            4 R                                                 R

              Here, we will ignore ball hop effects (i.e., the skid is assumed to take place
              smoothly, without hop interruption).
Therefore, the distances the CB and OB travel after a rolling direct hit are:

                                                                 
       d CB( v )  d skid v CB( v ) ωCB( v )  d roll_stop v skid v CB( v ) ωCB( v )   

                                                                  
       d OB( v )  d skid v OB( v ) ωOB( v )  d roll_stop v skid v OB( v ) ωOB( v )    

                 
            d OB v slow                               
                                                  d OB v medium 
                            6.08                                  6.08
            d CB v slow                         d CB v medium

These numbers are similar to the results from the analyses in TP A.16.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_6_cue_ball_table_lengths_of_travel_for_different_speeds_accounting_for_rail_rebound_and_drag_losses.pdf
title: TP B.6 - CB table lengths of travel for different speeds
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
technical proof                                                                                                  technical proof
                                               TP B.6
                         CB table lengths of travel for different speeds,
                          accounting for rail rebound and drag losses
                                                      supporting:
                                  “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                                 http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                   by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                          originally posted: 1/30/2009             last revision: 12/3/2023

  Typical speeds for a range of shots:
vtouch := 1.5 mph                vslow := 3  mph                vmedium_soft := 5  mph              vmedium := 7  mph

        vmedium_fast := 8  mph                      vfast := 12 mph                   vpower := 20 mph

  Relevant physical properties:
                                    μs := 0.2               typical ball-cloth coefficient of sliding friction
                                    μr := 0.01              typical ball-cloth coefficient of rolling resistance

  From TP 4.1, the distance required for a rolling ball to stop is:
                                                                                2
                                                                              v
                                                      d roll_stop ( v) :=
                                                                            2  μr g

Table lengths vs. speed, accounting for rail rebound and drag losses:

                      ec := 0.7               typical ball/rail COR with ball rolling into the rail cushion
                                              (see HSV B.15)

  When the CB rebounds off a rail cushion, speed is lost. If we assume the CB rebounds off the rail
  with stun (see HSV B.15 - a rolling ball usually rebounds with stun), the resulting skid distance
  and speed change are (from TP 4.1):
                                                 2
                                             12 v
                         d skid ( v) :=
                                          49 μs g

                                                                                                              5
                                                                                             (           )
                                                 2
                         vskid ( v , x) :=     v - 2  μs g x                         vskid v , d skid( v) =  v
                                                                                                              7
In the analysis below, to keep things reasonably simple, we assume the CB always rebounds off
the rail with stun. HSV B.15 shows that a skidding ball usually rebounds with some roll, but the
overall rebound efficiency, taking post-rebound skid into consideration, is fairly consistent for
most shots.

While the CB rolls, it slowly loses speed due to rolling resistance over distance x:
                                        1           2       1      2
                                             m v' =          m v - μr m g x
                                        2                   2

so the function of speed over distance, during rolling, is:
                                                                   2
                                          vroll( v , x) :=       v - 2  μr g x

Determine CB travel distance for a rolling CB with rail collisions:

                  TL := 100 in              TL = 8.333 ft                  9' table playing length

           d ( v) :=   x0
                       vv
                       n0
                       roll  1
                          (
                       if d roll_stop ( v) < TL         )
                              "less than one table length"
                              x  d roll_stop ( v)

                       otherwise
                           "ball will roll into a rail"
                              while ( v > 0 )
                                  if ( roll = 1 )
                                      if d roll_stop ( v) < ( n + 1 )TL - x

                                            "won't make it to rail again"
                                            x  x + d roll_stop( v)

                                            break
                                      otherwise
                                          "roll to the rail"
                                            nn+1
                                            v  vroll( v , n  TL - x)

                                            x  n  TL
                                            "rebound off the rail"
                                            v  e c v

                                            roll  0
                              otherwise
                                  "(roll = 0) : ball skidding"
                                          (
                                     if d skid ( v) < TL              )
                                              "ball will roll before next rail"
                                              x  x + d skid( v)

                                                     5
                                              v         v
                                                     7
                                              roll  1
                                     otherwise
                                         "ball will skid into next rail"
                                              nn+1
                                              v  vskid( v , TL)

                                              x  n  TL
                                              "rebound off the rail"
                                              v  e c v

                                              roll  0
                       x

        (          )
       d vtouch = 7.522 ft                                   (            )
                                                          d vslow = 14.033 ft                                   (            )
                                                                                                                d vmedium = 25.041 ft

                                 (            )
                                d vfast = 30.752 ft                                            (      )
                                                                                               d vpower = 39.291 ft

table lengths of travel:

        (
       d vtouch    ) = 0.903                                      (
                                                              d vslow          ) = 1.684                             (
                                                                                                                 d vmedium        ) = 3.005
             TL                                                       TL                                                 TL

                                     (
                                   d vfast        ) = 3.69                                 (
                                                                                        d vpower     ) = 4.715
                                         TL                                                    TL

            rolling lag shot:            v := vslow = 3  mph                       (estimate)

                           Given
                                     d ( v) = 2  TL

                            vlag := Find( v)                                   vlag = 3.465 mph
                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                           d vlag    ) =2
                                                                                                            TL
   v := 0  mph , 0.5 mph .. vpower         vpower = 20 mph

         5

         4

         3
 d( v)
  TL
         2

         1

         0
             0              5          10                       15             20
                                       v
                                       mph

                  vfast
                            = 1.714
                                                   (
                                                  d vfast   )        = 1.228
                 vmedium                      (
                                             d vmedium          )
                   vfast
                            =4
                                                     ( ) = 2.191
                                                   d vfast
                   vslow                          d ( vslow)

                   vpower
                            = 13.333               (
                                                  d vpower  ) = 5.224
                   vtouch
                                                  d ( vtouch)

So the speed must be increased by a much larger percentage to create a
given percentage of distance increase, and this effect is even stronger at
faster speeds and longer distances. In other words, it takes a lot more
speed to create more distance, especially at higher speeds and longer
distances.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_7_effect_of_squirt_on_the_amount_of_spin.pdf
title: TP B.7 - Effect of squirt on the amount of spin
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                          technical proof
                                           TP B.7
                          Effect of squirt on the amount of spin
                                            supporting:
                          “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                        http://billiards.colostate.edu
                              by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                     originally posted: 2/5/2009         last revision: 2/5/2009

                     See TP A.31 and my December '07 article for background information.

                                                                        effective
                                                                         offset
                                      actual
                                    tip offset
                                                                                     exaggerated
                                                                                     squirt angle

                                                         

                                    C
                  resultant
                                                                                          
                   impulse
                     (F’)                   R      
                                    b                        beff
                                             

                                                                                                squirt
                                                                                                                 v
                                                                                                angle
                                                                                                 

          From the diagram above, the effective offset, for a cue with a squirt angle "α" and actual
          tip offset "b," is given by:

                                  b eff = R sin( β  α) = R sin asin
                                                                             b     
                                                                                 α
                                                                         R       

                                                      b eff ( b α)  R sin asin
                                                                                          b    
                                R  1.125  in                                              α
                                                                                    R        
From TP A.12, the spin rate factor (SRF), which quantifies the amount of spin in
relation to the roll rate of the ball, is:

                                           5 b eff
                                  SRF =     
                                           2 R

Therefore, the "amount of spin" is directly proportional to the effective offset.

From my September '07 article, typical values for squirt angles for regular and low squirt
cues, at maximum tip offset (R/2), are:
                      R
               b                     αreg  2.5 deg          αls  1.8 deg
                      2

Here's how the amount of spin compares, as a percentage:

                                       
                                b eff b αls
                                                  1  2.339 %
                               b eff  b αreg

 Therefore, for maximum tip offset, a low-squirt cue can generate only about 2%
 more spin than a typical regular squirt cue.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_8_draw_shot_physics.pdf
title: TP B.8 - Draw shot physics
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: yes
text:
technical proof                                                                          technical proof
                                                TP B.8
                                            Draw shot physics
                                              supporting:
                            “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                         http://billiards.colostate.edu
                             by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                       originally posted: 2/21/2009          last revision: 7/10/2011

                                     v                                           v’
                                                                              ’

                                     R
                  vs            mb
                                                      b
                  ms

                                                            ddrag

                                                    v’’’                        v’’
                                              ’’’=v’’’/R                       ’’     vOB
    stopped

                             droll                                  dskid

                                            ddraw

   In the analysis below, I will begin by assuming the balls and tip are perfect (e b =1.0, μb =0,
   ηtip =100%), but I will account for these effects later. With perfect balls, v''=0, ω''=-ω', and
   vOB=v'.
Relevant physical parameters (from "physics" FAQ):
                    μs  0.2               typical ball-cloth coefficient of sliding friction
                    μr  0.01              typical ball-cloth coefficient of rolling resistance

                    R  1.125  in         ball radius:
                          6
                    mr                    typical ball-mass-to-cue-mass ratio (m b /ms):
                          19
                    eb  1                 ball-to-ball coefficient of restitution (assumed perfectly elastic)

                    μb  0.06              ball-to-ball coefficient of friction (varies with ball surface speed)

From TP A.30, the CB speed (v) and spin (ω) resulting from cue speed v s and tip offset b,
assuming a perfect tip, are:

                                  2 vs
                                                                                                
                                                                                         5              b
       v v s b                                                         ω v s b    v v s b 
                                           2                                           2                2
                       1  mr  5   b  
                                                                                                        R
                                2  R 

             Note - ω<0 implies backspin; ω>0 implies topspin or forward roll

From TP 2.1, the safe miscue limit is generally assumed to be:
                                      R
                       b max             0.563  in            b  0 0.05 b max  b max
                                      2

Based on TP B.6, typical draw shot CB speeds (which are higher than other shots) are probably
in the following range:

    v slow  8  mph                 v medium  10 mph              v fast  14 mph            v power  19 mph

From the equation above for ball speed, these correspond to center-ball-hit cue speeds of:

                                                           1  mr
                                             v s( v )               v
                                                              2

                                 
      v s_slow  v s v slow  5.263  mph                                                              
                                                                     v s_medium  v s v medium  6.579  mph

                             
      v s_fast  v s v fast  9.211  mph                                                         
                                                                       v s_power  v s v power  12.5 mph
        Here is how the cue ball speed varies with tip offset for a given cue speed, assuming a perfect
        tip:

                            160

                            150                                                                             
                                                                                                           v v s_medium 0      
                                                                                                                                       152  %
                                                                                                                v s_medium
                       
                            140
       v vs_medium b
                            130
        vs_medium %
                            120                                                                        
                                                                                                      v v s_medium b max       
                                                                                                                                       103.051  %
                            110                                                                            v s_medium

                            100
                                  0           20        40        60        80        100
                                                              b
                                                         bmax  %

            So with a center-ball hit, assuming a perfect tip, the CB speed is about 50% more
            than (3/2-times) the cue speed; and at a maximum offset shot, the CB and
            original cue speeds are nearly equal.

        Here is how the cue ball spin varies with tip offset for a given cue speed:

                                      3
                            1.5 10
                                                                                                  
                                                                                              ω v s_medium b max      
                                                                                                                                      151.695  %
                             1 10
                                      3                                                       
                                                                                             ω v s_medium 0.5b max         
   
 ω vs_medium b   
            rpm
                                  500                                                             
                                                                                              ω v s_medium b max      
                                                                                                                                      104.313  %
                                                                                              
                                                                                             ω v s_medium 0.9b max         
                                      0
                                          0        20        40        60        80    100
                                                                  b
                                                             bmax %

        So, assuming a perfect tip, more tip offset always gives you more spin, but the
        increase in spin isn't as great with increasing offset. The spin at maximum
        offset is only about 50% faster than the spin at half the maximum offset, and only
        about 5% than the spin at 90% maximum offset.
From TP 4.1, the CB speed and spin change during drag over distance x on the
way to the OB according to:

                                             
                                  v drag v x μs                     2
                                                                          v  2  μs g  x

                                                   5                                                                     
                              
                      ωdrag v ω x μs  ω      v
                                                  2 R 
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                              v  2  μs g  x
                                                                                                                          

From TP 4.1, the distance required for stun to develop (for ω < 0) is:

                                                                    2  R ( ω)     ( ω)  R
                                    
                             d stun v ω μs                     5  μs g 
                                                                                 v 
                                                                                         5 
                                                                                               

From TP B.5, the distance required for a skidding (sliding) CB to develop natural roll, and
the speed when roll first develops are:

                   d skid v ω μs  sign
                                                                   ω                     6  v  5v  R ω  ( R ω) 
                                                            v                       2                     2                   2
                                                          R               49 μs g
                                                                     5          2
                                   v skid( v ω)                      v         R ω
                                                                     7          7

From TP B.6, the distance required for a rolling ball to come to a stop is:
                                                                                              2
                                                               
                                                                                          v
                                            d roll v μr  sign( v ) 
                                                                                        2  μr g

and the speed slows during rolling over distance x according to:

                                              
                                   v roll v x μr                     2
                                                                          v  2  μr g  x

For a draw shot, where the CB still has backspin at OB impact,

                                                             
                                  d draw = d skid v'' ω''μs  d roll v''' μr                                 
Assuming perfect balls (v''=0, ω''=-ω'),

                                                             
                                  d draw = d skid 0 ω'μs  d roll v''' μr                                
                                     ω'' = ω' = ωdrag v ω d drag μs                                  
                                                                    
                                                           v = v v s b

                                                            ω = ω v s b 

                                                          v''' = v skid 0 ω'μs
  Combining everything gives:

                                                                   
                                   d draw = d skid 0 ω'μs  d roll v''' μr                                  
                                                                              2                     2
                                                              2  ( R ω')                 v'''
                                            d draw =                              
                                                               49 μs g                  2  μr g

                                                              
                                           2  R ωdrag v ω d drag                2               v skid( 0 ω')
                                                                                                                              2
                         d draw =                                                                   
                                                          49 μs g                                           2  μr g

                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                         2  2 μ  g   7 R ωdragv ω ddrag
                        2                                                                   1             2
          d draw =               R ωdrag v ω d drag
                     49 μ  g
                            s                                                                   r

                                                      2
                                                 2R  1                     1 
                                d draw =
                                                 49g  μs
                                                                       
                                                                           μr 
                                                                                                    
                                                                                   ωdrag v ω d drag                 2
                                                                             

                                       2                                                                                           2
                                 2R  11         5                                                     2                   
                     d draw =            ω       v                                              v  2  μs g  d drag 
                              49g μs   μr        2 R                                                                       
                                        

To account for energy loss in the tip-ball collision, we can use the following equations for ball
speed and spin instead (from TP A.30), which account for tip inefficiency:

                         η  0.87                            typical cue tip efficiency

                                                                           1η      5 b 
                                                                                                                 2
                                                     1        η               1     
                                                                            mr      2 R 
                                  
                         v v s b  v s
                                                                                 2
                                                               1  mr    b  
                                                                        5
                                                                       2  R 

                                                                                         
                                                           5              b
                                             ω v s b    v v s b 
                                                           2                2
                                                                          R
        Here is how the cue ball speed varies with tip offset for a given cue speed, accounting for tip
        inefficiency:

                            140

                                                                                          
                                                                                      v v s_medium 0     
                            120                                                                                 127.452  %
                                                                                              v s_medium
        
       v vs_medium b  
                            100
        vs_medium %
                                                                                      
                                                                                     v v s_medium b max          
                             80                                                                                          74.628 %
                                                                                              v s_medium

                             60
                                  0       20    40         60    80   100
                                                      b
                                                 bmax  %

            So with a center-ball hit, and a typical tip inefficiency, the CB speed is about
            30% more than the cue speed; and at a maximum tip offset shot, the CB speed is
            about 75% (3/4) of the original cue speed.

        Here is how the cue ball spin varies with tip offset for a given cue speed:

                                  3
                            1 10
                                                                                 
                                                                             ω v s_medium b max          
                                                                                                                        134.983  %
                              800
                                                                             
                                                                            ω v s_medium 0.5b max            
   
 ω vs_medium b            600

            rpm               400
                                                                                 
                                                                             ω v s_medium b max          
                              200                                                                                       100.728  %
                                                                             
                                                                            ω v s_medium 0.9b max            
                                  0
                                      0    20    40         60   80   100
                                                       b
                                                  bmax  %

        So, with a typical tip inefficiency, more tip offset gives you more spin, but the
        increase in spin isn't as great with increasing offset. The spin at maximum
        offset is only about 35% faster than the spin at half the maximum offset. Also,
        the spin at 90% offset is nearly equal to the spin at maximum (100%) offset.
To account for ball inelasticity, from TP A.5 (Equation 7),

                                                                       1  eb 
                                                             v'' =                  v'
                                                                           2

and to account for ball friction, from TP A.27,
                                                                                                     v
                                                                                           1.088
                                                                                                     m
                                                                      3                             s
                                               μ( v )  9.951  10         0.108  e

                                          
                    v rel v ωx ωz ϕ          v sin(ϕ)  R ωz2  R ωx cos( ϕ) 2

                                           μ vrel v ωx ωz ϕ   v  cos( ϕ) 1 
                                    min                                                 v  sin( ϕ)  R ωz
                                                   v rel v ωx ωz ϕ
                                                                                      7
                                                                                         
                            
         tanθ v ωx ωz ϕ 
                                                                        v  cos( ϕ)

                                                                                              
                                                               5 v
                                   Δω v ωx ωz ϕ           tanθ v ωx ωz ϕ
                                                               2 R

where Δω is the change in spin experienced by both the CB and OB.

With this analysis, topspin in analogous to sidespin in TP A.27, and the throw is in the vertical
direction. Therefore,

                    ϕ  0                           ωz = ω'                             ωx  0
                 no cut angle                        (topspin)                     no sidespin (English)

With topspin, ωz > 0 and Δω < 0. With bottomspin, ωz < 0 and Δω > 0.

For a follow shot, the CB spin, after impact, is:
                                                         ω'' = ω'  Δω

For a draw shot, the CB spin, after impact, is:
                                                       ω'' = ( ω'  Δω)
      Now let's see how draw distance varies with cue speed, tip offset, shot distance, and
      table conditions. The following program calculates the draw distance for any case,
      and accounts for imperfect balls and an imperfect tip.

                              
d draw v s b d drag μs μr          
                                       v  v v s b

                                       ω  ω v s b 

                                                             
                                       d stun  d stun v ω μs                  
                                          
                                       if d stun  d drag           
                                              "CB hits OB with topspin"
                                              d pre_roll  d skid v ω μs                  
                                                 
                                              if d pre_roll  d drag                   
                                                     "CB rolls before OB contact"
                                                     v pre_roll  v skid( v ω)

                                                     d_roll_stop  d roll v pre_roll μr             
                                                                                       
                                                     if d_roll_stop  d drag  d pre_roll 
                                                                                                              
                                                         "CB doesn't reach OB"
                                                         v'  0
                                                     otherwise
                                                         "CB rolls into OB"
                                                                                                   
                                                         v'  v rollv pre_roll  d drag  d pre_roll μr
                                                                                                                           
                                                            v'
                                                     ω' 
                                                            R
                                              otherwise
                                                  "CB slides into OB with partial roll"
                                                                   
                                                     ω'  ωdrag v ω d drag μs
                                                     v'  v drag v d drag μs

                                                         1  eb 
                                              v''                       v'
                                                            2
                                              ω''  ( ω'  Δω( v' 0 ω'0 ) )
                                              v'''  v skid( v'' ω'')

                                                                              
                                              d draw   d skid v'' ω''μs  d roll v''' μr                 
                         otherwise
                             "CB hits OB with backspin"
                                                        
                               v'  v drag v d drag μs

                               ω'  ωdrag v ω d drag μs

                               ω''  ( ω'  Δω( v' 0 ω'0 ) )

                               v'' 
                                       1  eb  v'
                                           2
                               v'''  v skid( v'' ω'')

                                                                            
                               d draw  d skid v'' ω''μs  d roll v''' μr       

Typical shot distances:
      d drag_short  1  ft                d drag_medium  4  ft                    d drag_long  8  ft

                                                                              b max
Valid range of tip offset (for no miscue):                   b  0  in             b max
                                                                               50
NOTE - In all of the plots below, a negative d draw implies follow and a zero implies a stop shot
or the CB not making it to the OB.

       Draw distance vs. tip offset for various cue speeds:

d drag  d drag_short

                                  
                           ddraw vs_slow b ddrag μs μr                  30

                                            ft

                                  
                           ddraw vs_medium b ddrag μs μr              20
    A                                            ft

                                  
                           ddraw vs_fast b ddrag μs μr   
                                            ft                                   10

                                  
                           ddraw vs_power b ddrag μs μr          
                                             ft
                                                                                  0                               0

                                                                                      0   20   40       60   80   100
                                                                                                    b
                                                                                                bmax %

 d drag  d drag_medium

                                                                                 20

                                  
                           ddraw vs_slow b ddrag μs μr       
                                            ft

                                  
                           ddraw vs_medium b ddrag μs μr             
                                                 ft                              10

     B                            
                           ddraw vs_fast b ddrag μs μr   
                                            ft

                                  
                           ddraw vs_power b ddrag μs μr          
                                             ft                                   0                               0

                                                                                      0   20   40       60   80   100
                                                                                                    b
                                                                                                bmax %
d drag  d drag_long

                                                                            10

                               
                        ddraw vs_slow b ddrag μs μr       
                                         ft
                                                                             5
                               
                        ddraw vs_medium b ddrag μs μr          
                                              ft

    C                          
                        ddraw vs_fast b ddrag μs μr                 0                                  0

                                         ft

                               
                        ddraw vs_power b ddrag μs μr           5
                                          ft

                                                                            10
                                                                                  0   20   40         60   80       100
                                                                                                b
                                                                                            bmax  %

       Draw distance vs. tip offset for various shot (drag) distances:

   v s  v s_slow
                                                                            4

                               
                        ddraw vs b ddrag_short μs μr               2
                                          ft

                               
                        ddraw vs b ddrag_medium μs μr           0                                      0

  D                                            ft
                                                                           2
                               
                        ddraw vs b ddrag_long μs μr       
                                         ft                                4

                                                                           6
                                                                                0     20   40       60     80   100
                                                                                                b
                                                                                            bmax %
v s  v s_medium

                                                               10

                      
               ddraw vs b ddrag_short μs μr            5
                                ft

                      
               ddraw vs b ddrag_medium μs μr      
                                                                0                                           0
E
                                     ft

                      
               ddraw vs b ddrag_long μs μr   
                                ft
                                                               5

                                                               10
                                                                     0   20   40             60    80       100
                                                                                     b
                                                                                   bmax %

    v s  v s_fast

                                                               20

                      
               ddraw vs b ddrag_short μs μr   
                                ft                             10

                      
               ddraw vs b ddrag_medium μs μr      
                                     ft
F                     
               ddraw vs b ddrag_long μs μr             0                                       0
                                ft

                                                               10
                                                                     0   20   40         60       80    100
                                                                                     b
                                                                               bmax %
      v s  v s_power

                                                40

                                                30

      
ddraw vs b ddrag_short μs μr   
                 ft                             20

      
ddraw vs b ddrag_medium μs μr      
                      ft

      
ddraw vs b ddrag_long μs μr            10
                 ft

                                                 0                                      0

                                                10
                                                      0   20   40             60   80   100
                                                                      b
                                                                    bmax %

                                                           G
    Sensitivity analysis for cue speed and tip offset for various draw distances:

          d drag  d drag_medium
                                                                        b  0 0.5% b max  50 % b max

                                                         2

                 
          ddraw vs_fast b ddrag μs μr           1                                                         1

                           ft

                 
          ddraw 1.25vs_fast b ddrag μs μr   
    H                           ft
                                                         0                                                         0

                                                        1
                                                             0        10            20             30         40   50
                                                                                           b
                                                                                         bmax %

            d drag  d drag_short                                   b  0 0.5% b max  15 % b max

                                                         0.2

                 
          ddraw 0.75vs_fast b ddrag μs μr    0.1
                                ft

                 
          ddraw vs_fast b ddrag μs μr   
I                          ft
                                                             0                                                         0

                 
          ddraw 1.25vs_fast b ddrag μs μr   
                                ft
                                                         0.1

                                                         0.2
                                                                 0              5                       10             15
                                                                                               b
                                                                                          bmax  %
           d drag  d drag_medium                                    b  10% b max 10.1% b max  30 % b max

                                                            0.2

                                                           0.15

                
         ddraw vs_fast b ddrag μs μr   
                          ft

                                                      
                                                            0.1                                                                .1
         ddraw 1.25vs_fast b ddrag μs μr

J                              ft

                                                           0.05

                                                                0                                                              0
                                                                 10         15              20                  25              30
                                                                                             b
                                                                                          bmax  %

    d drag  d drag_medium
                                                                                                          v s_high  v s_low
v s_low  v s_fast                  v s_high  1.5 v s_fast           v s  v s_low v s_low                              v s_high
                                                                                                                 50

               b small  25% b max                        b medium  50% b max          b large  100  % b max

                                                           15

                    
          ddraw vs bsmall ddrag μs μr      
                               ft                          10

                    
          ddraw vs bmedium ddrag μs μr         
                                ft

K                   
          ddraw vs blarge ddrag μs μr              5
                               ft

                                                            0                                                                   0
                                                                9      10            11              12              13          14
                                                                                            vs

                                                                                           mph
                v 1  0.75 v s_fast                          v 2  v s_fast                             v 3  1.25 v s_fast

                b 1  24.6% b max                              b 2  14.5% b max                        b 3  10% b max

 stun-through (roll through)
                                                                 d drag  1.5 ft 1.51 ft  2.5 ft
 stun-follow shot:

                    
           ddraw v1 b1 ddrag μs μr 0.15
                             ft

                    
           ddraw v2 b2 ddrag μs μr     
 L                           ft
                                                       0.1

                    
           ddraw v3 b3 ddrag μs μr     
                             ft
                                                   0.05

                                                        0                                                                          0
                                                        1.4           1.6         1.8           2          2.2          2.4         2.6
                                                                                           ddrag
stun-back (roll back)                                                                          ft
stun-draw shot:

          b 1  12.5% b max                                 b 2  5.9% b max                      b 3  3.2% b max

                                                   0                                                                          0

                                             0.02
            
      ddraw v1 b1 ddrag μs μr   
                        ft

            
      ddraw v2 b2 ddrag μs μr     0.04
M
                        ft

                                       
      ddraw v3 b3 ddrag μs μr  0.06

                        ft
                                             0.08

                                              0.1
                                                 1.4            1.6         1.8           2          2.2          2.4         2.6
                                                                                        ddrag

                                                                                          ft
stop shot:
           b 1  17% b max                                     b 2  9.3% b max                      b 3  5.87% b max

                                               0.02
           
     ddraw v1 b1 ddrag μs μr   
                     ft

           
     ddraw v2 b2 ddrag μs μr   
                                                  0                                                                        0
N
                     ft

           
     ddraw v3 b3 ddrag μs μr   
                     ft

                                            0.02

                                                  1.4              1.6         1.8           2         2.2        2.4       2.6
                                                                                          ddrag

                                                                                             ft

                                                          d drag  3.5 ft 3.51 ft  4.5 ft

                   v 1  0.75 v s_power                            v 2  v s_power                         v 3  1.25 v s_power

               b 1  18.5% b max                                 b 2  9.9% b max                        b 3  6.2% b max

                                                0.02

               
      ddraw v1 b1 ddrag μs μr       0.01
                          ft

               
      ddraw v2 b2 ddrag μs μr      
                                                      0                                                                        0
O
                          ft

               
      ddraw v3 b3 ddrag μs μr      
                          ft
                                                0.01

                                                0.02
                                                    3.4              3.6         3.8              4     4.2         4.4        4.6
                                                                                            ddrag

                                                                                                  ft
   Let's look at how draw distance varies with shot distance, speed, and tip offset for a fairly
   powerful draw shot, where the OB is 6 feet away and you want to draw the CB 6 feet
   back to its original location:
                             d drag  6  ft                 d drag  0.75 d drag 0.76 d drag  1.25 d drag
               v 1  11.65  mph v 2  11.25  mph                  v 3  11.1 mph                  v 4  12.42  mph
               b 1  b max             b 2  .9 b max                  b 3  .75 b max              b 4  .5 b max

                                                     7
                                                                                           6

                   
            ddraw v1 b1 ddrag μs μr   
                             ft
                                                    6.5
                   
            ddraw v2 b2 ddrag μs μr   
                             ft

P                  
            ddraw v3 b3 ddrag μs μr    6                                                                            6

                             ft

                   
            ddraw v4 b4 ddrag μs μr    5.5
                             ft

                                                     5
                                                              5.6            5.8           6               6.2         6.4
                                                                                         ddrag

                                                                                           ft

d drag  6  ft       b  0 0.5% b max  100  % b max

                                                    15

                                                    10
                       
              ddraw v1 b ddrag μs μr    
                              ft

                                               
                                                     5
              ddraw v4 b ddrag μs μr

                              ft
 Q                                                   0

                                                    5
                                                          0          20            40              60            80          100
                                                                                           b
                                                                                        bmax  %
 Let's look at how draw distance varies with shot distance, speed, and tip offset for an
 example draw shot, where the OB is 9 feet away and you want to draw the CB the
 equivalent of 18 feet back:
                    d drag  9  ft  d drag  0.75 d drag 0.76 d drag  1.25 d drag
                v 1  15.7 mph v 2  15.26  mph                v 3  15.24  mph         v 4  17.45  mph
                b 1  b max       b 2  .9 b max                 b 3  .75 b max          b 4  .5 b max

                                            20

            
      ddraw v1 b1 ddrag μs μr   
                       ft                   19

            
      ddraw v2 b2 ddrag μs μr   
                       ft                   18                                                             18

R ddraw v3 b3 ddragμs μr
                       ft                   17

            
      ddraw v4 b4 ddrag μs μr   
                       ft                   16

                                            15
                                                 8           8.5                9             9.5             10
                                                                            ddrag

                                                                                ft

                d drag  9  ft             b  0 0.5% b max  100  % b max

                                                30

                  
         ddraw v1 b ddrag μs μr      20
                            ft

                  
         ddraw v4 b ddrag μs μr     
 S                          ft                  10

                                                 0

                                                     0      20            40             60         80            100
                                                                                     b
                                                                               bmax %
 Let's look at how draw distance varies with shot distance, speed, and tip offset for a more
 modest draw shot, where the OB is 3 feet away and you want to draw the CB 3 feet back
 to its original location:
                             d drag  3  ft                   d drag  0.75 d drag 0.76 d drag  1.25 d drag
               v 1  8.3 mph        v 2  8.02 mph                  v 3  7.95 mph                  v 4  8.98 mph
               b 1  b max             b 2  .9 b max                    b 3  .75 b max              b 4  .5 b max

                                                    6                                                                         6

                   
            ddraw v1 b1 ddrag μs μr   
                             ft

                   
            ddraw v2 b2 ddrag μs μr 4 
                             ft

T                  
            ddraw v3 b3 ddrag μs μr                                                                                  3

                             ft
                                                    2
                   
            ddraw v4 b4 ddrag μs μr   
                             ft

                                                    0
                                                        2               2.5                 3                 3.5                 4
                                                                                          ddrag

                                                                                           ft
d drag  3  ft       b  0 0.5% b max  100  % b max

                                                    10

                       
              ddraw v1 b ddrag μs μr     5
                              ft
U
                       
              ddraw v4 b ddrag μs μr    
                              ft                        0

                                                    5
                                                            0          20            40              60             80            100
                                                                                                b
                                                                                          bmax  %
Now let's look at the effects of cloth conditions (a sticky cloth vs. a slick cloth):

                                μs_slick  0.1                       μs_sticky  0.3

                               v s1  10 mph                          v s2  15 mph

       b 1  36.6% b max            b 2  80% b max             b 3  22.9% b max   b 4  30.1% b max

                                              d drag  2  ft 2.1 ft  5ft

           
     ddraw vs1 b1 ddrag μs_slick μr    6
                       ft
V
           
     ddraw vs1 b2 ddrag μs_sticky μr   
                        ft

           
     ddraw vs2 b3 ddrag μs_slick μr    4
                       ft

           
     ddraw vs2 b4 ddrag μs_sticky μr   
                        ft
                                                   2

                                                   0                                                      0
                                                       2                   3              4                   5
                                                                                  ddrag

                                                                                   ft
    Optimal tip offset for maximum draw for different speeds and drag distances:

               v s  v s_power            d drag  d drag_long             b  .75 b max (initial guess)

                                                                                
                                   b_opt( b )  d draw v s b d drag μs μr
                 Given
                         b0
                         b  b max

                 b_opt  Maximize( b_opt b )  0.436  in

                                                                                    
                     b_opt
                              77.48  %        d draw v s b_opt d drag μs μr  6.84 ft
                     b max

                                   Here are some example values:

v s_slow  5.263  mph          d drag_short  1  ft           b_opt  82.3%            d_draw  2.6ft

v s_medium  6.579  mph        d drag_short  1  ft           b_opt  87.7%            d_draw  6.2ft

v s_fast  9.211  mph          d drag_short  1  ft           b_opt  92.7%            d_draw  16.2ft

v s_power  12.5 mph           d drag_short  1  ft           b_opt  95.2%            d_draw  33.9ft

v s_medium  6.579  mph        d drag_medium  4  ft          b_opt  61.8%            d_draw  0.0ft

v s_fast  9.211  mph          d drag_medium  4  ft          b_opt  77.9%            d_draw  5.3ft

v s_power  12.5 mph           d drag_medium  4  ft          b_opt  87.7%            d_draw  24.6ft

v s_fast  9.211  mph          d drag_long  8  ft            b_opt  61.1%            d_draw  0.0ft

v s_power  12.5 mph           d drag_long  8  ft            b_opt  76.3%            d_draw  8.1ft
Useful conclusions from all of the plots above, which are consistent with generally
accepted "best practices" and good-player intuition:

         1.   Generally, to get more draw, you must hit the cue ball harder and lower (see
              graphs A and G). No big surprise here!

         2.   More tip offset does not produce significantly more draw as you approach the
              miscue limit; so, generally, it is advisable to not hit too close to the miscue
              limit (see graphs A and G).

         3.   With larger drag distances, and for a given maximum cue speed, max draw
              occurs at less than maximum tip offset (at about 70%-80% tip offset). In other
              words, you don't get more power draw by hitting closer to the miscue limit (see
              Graphs G, Q, S, and U, and see the data on the previous page).

         4.   In general, with a draw shot with a medium desired draw distance, a slower cue
              speed with more tip offset will result in better draw distance control than a
              faster cue speed with less offset (see the slopes of the curves in Graphs A and G
              at a given draw distance).

         5.   Stop shots are much less sensitive to tip offset position than draw shots are. In
              other words, CB position is much easier to control with a stop shot , as
              compared to a draw shot (see Graphs G, H, I, N, and O).

         6.   For a short stop shot, slower speed offers slightly better control (see the overall
              slopes of the curves in Graph I). For longer stop shots, faster speed appears to
              offer slightly better control (see Graphs N and O).

         7.   For stun-through (small controlled follow) and stun-back (small controlled draw),
              a firmer hit closer to center offers better CB control (see Graphs L and M).

         8.   It is much easier to control draw distance on a new, slick cloth than it is on a
              "sticky" cloth, especially with lower-speed shots (see Graph T). The statement
              assumes the player is equally well "adjusted" to each cloth condition. Any player
              will need to adjust when playing under different cloth conditions.

         9.   It is easier to draw the ball on slick cloth, and faster cloth allows for
              greater draw distances .
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/tp_b_9_draw_shot_spin_vs_spin_ratio.pdf
title: TP B.9 - Draw shot spin vs. spin ratio
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
technical proof                                                                                               technical proof
                                                 TP B.9
                                       Draw shot spin vs. spin ratio
                                                 supporting:
                               “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards”
                                            http://billiards.colostate.edu
                                by David G. Alciatore, PhD, PE ("Dr. Dave")

                        originally posted: 3/5/2009          last revision: 3/5/2009

                                       v                                        v’
                                                                              ’

                                      R
               vs               mb
                                                    b
             ms

                                                         ddrag

  With a straight draw shot (with no cut angle), the amount of draw is determined solely by the
  amount of CB spin at contact with the OB (-ω'). This is the topic of TP B.8. Here we want to
  also look at the spin-to-speed ratio (-ω'R/v'). For some cases, it is more important to maximum
  spin-to-speed ratio instead of spin. Examples include shots where you don't want to hit the OB
  too hard (e.g., to leave the OB by a pocket if you can't or don't want to pocket it, or to increase
  the effective size of the pocket) while still maximizing draw (e.g., to achieve position for the
  next shot or to play a safety), and trying to keep the draw angle as narrow as possible when
  there is a cut angle (e.g., to avoid a ball or a pocket, or to get straight up or down the table
  better).

All of the data and equations and parameters below are from TP B.8.

    Typical shot distances:
              d drag_short  1  ft               d drag_medium  4  ft            d drag_long  8  ft

    Miscue limit and tip offset range:
                                                             R                                         b max
                    R  1.125  in               b max         0.563  in         b  0  in             b max
                                                             2                                          50
        Relevant physical parameters:

                              μs  0.2                       typical ball-cloth coefficient of sliding friction
                              μr  0.01                      typical ball-cloth coefficient of rolling resistance
                                    6
                              mr                            typical ball-mass-to-cue-mass ratio (m b /ms):
                                    19

                              η  0.87                       typical cue tip efficiency
                                              rpm min
                              rps                           revs per second
                                                   sec

             v slow  8  mph                         v medium  10 mph                  v fast  14 mph                  v power  19 mph

                                                                              1  mr
                                                              v s( v )                 v
                                                                                  2

                                                  
                 v s_slow  v s v slow  5.263  mph                                                              
                                                                                        v s_medium  v s v medium  6.579  mph       
                                              
                 v s_fast  v s v fast  9.211  mph                                                                         
                                                                                            v s_power  v s v power  12.5 mph

                                                                                                              5                                                   
                   
 v drag v x μs 
                              2
                             v  2  μs g  x                                                          
                                                                                 ωdrag v ω x μs  ω       v
                                                                                                             2 R 
                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                               v  2  μs g  x
                                                                                                                                                                   

                                                                                 2  R ( ω)     ( ω)  R
                                                          
                                                   d stun v ω μs            5  μs g 
                                                                                              v 
                                                                                                      5 
                                                                                                            

                                                                                                                                                 5          2
d skid v ω μs  sign  ω           6  v  5v  R ω  ( R ω) 
                             v          2              2                     2                                         v skid( v ω)              v         R ω
                                                                                                                                                 7          7
                            R     49 μs g

                                                                     2
                                                                                                           
                                                                 v                                                         2
                        d roll v μr  sign( v )                                           v roll v x μr        v  2  μr g  x
                                                               2  μr g

                                          1η      5 b 
                                                                             2
                        1        η           1     
                                           mr      2 R 
                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                     5              b
   v v s b  v s                                                                                   ω v s b    v v s b 
                                                    2                                                              2                2
                                  1  mr    b  
                                           5                                                                                        R
                                          2  R 
             Now let's see how CB spin and spin ratio, at OB contact, varies with cue speed, tip
             offset, shot distance, and table conditions.
                                                           SNR: Spin aNd spin Ratio

                                
   SNR v s b d drag μs μr            
                                         v  v v s b

                                         ω  ω v s b 

                                                               
                                         d stun  d stun v ω μs            
                                            
                                         if d stun  d drag        
                                                "CB hits OB with topspin"
                                                                           
                                                d pre_roll  d skid v ω μs                 
                                                   
                                                if d pre_roll  d drag             
                                                       "CB rolls before OB contact"
                                                       v pre_roll  v skid( v ω)

                                                                                       
                                                       d_roll_stop  d roll v pre_roll μr            
                                                                                   
                                                       if d_roll_stop  d drag  d pre_roll 
                                                                                                          
                                                           "CB doesn't reach OB"
                                                           v'  0
                                                       otherwise
                                                           "CB rolls into OB"
                                                                                                   
                                                           v'  v rollv pre_roll  d drag  d pre_roll μr
                                                                                                                        
                                                              v'
                                                       ω' 
                                                              R
                                                otherwise
                                                    "CB slides into OB with partial roll"
                                                                   
                                                       ω'  ωdrag v ω d drag μs
                                                       v'  v drag v d drag μs

                                         otherwise
                                             "CB hits OB with backspin"
                                                                         
                                                v'  v drag v d drag μs

                                                ω'  ωdrag v ω d drag μs

                                                          T
                                          ω' v' 
                                                 
                                              R

                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                         SNR v s b d drag μs μr 0
                                      
spin v s b d drag μs μr  SNR v s b d drag μs μr 0                                            
                                                                                   ratio v s b d drag μs μr 
                                                                                                                         SNR v s b d drag μs μr 1
       Spin and spin ratio vs. tip offset for various cue speeds:

                                                                                                        b max
d drag  d drag_short                b min  .2 b max                         b  b min b min              b max
                                                                                                            50

                                                                      30

                    
                spin vs_slow b ddrag μs μr       
                                rps

                    
                spin vs_medium b ddrag μs μr 20           
                                  rps
 A                  
                spin vs_fast b ddrag μs μr   
                               rps
                                                                      10
                    
                spin vs_power b ddrag μs μr           
                                 rps

                                                                       0
                                                                        20             40               60              80       100
                                                                                                        b
                                                                                                  bmax %

                                                                      150

                     
                ratio vs_slow b ddrag μs μr       
                                 %

                     
                ratio vs_medium b ddrag μs μr 100         
 B                                   %

                     
                ratio vs_fast b ddrag μs μr   
                                %
                                                                       50
                     
                ratio vs_power b ddrag μs μr          
                                  %

                                                                           0                                                     0
                                                                            20          40              60                  80   100
                                                                                                         b
                                                                                                   bmax  %
                                                                                                   b max
d drag  d drag_medium                b min  .2 b max                  b  b min b min               b max
                                                                                                       50

                                                                30

                      
                  spin vs_fast b ddrag μs μr           20

                                 rps

                      
                  spin vs_power b ddrag μs μr       
 C                                 rps
                                                                10

                                                                 0
                                                                  20           40             60                 80    100
                                                                                              b
                                                                                           bmax  %

                                                                150

                       
                  ratio vs_fast b ddrag μs μr          100

                                  %
 D                     
                  ratio vs_power b ddrag μs μr      
                                    %
                                                                 50

                                                                     0                                                 0
                                                                      20        40                60              80   100
                                                                                                  b
                                                                                            bmax %
        Spin and spin ratio vs. tip offset for various shot (drag) distances:

    v s  v s_medium

                                                          12

                                                          10

                                                           8
                        
                spin vs b ddrag_short μs μr   
E                                rps
                                                           6

                                                           4

                                                           2
                                                            20   40     60       80   100
                                                                         b
                                                                      bmax  %

                                                       120

                                                       100

                                                          80

                    
               ratio vs b ddrag_short μs μr    60
F                               %

                                                          40

                                                          20

                                                           0                          0
                                                            20   40      60      80   100
                                                                         b
                                                                      bmax %
    v s  v s_fast

                                                                     20

                                                                     15

                        
                 spin vs b ddrag_short μs μr   
                                    rps

                                                                
                                                                     10
G                spin vs b ddrag_medium μs μr

                                      rps

                                                                      5

                                                                      0                                            0
                                                                       20         40          60         80        100
                                                                                               b
                                                                                            bmax  %

                                                                         150

                            
                      ratio vs b ddrag_short μs μr              100

                                       %

H                           
                      ratio vs b ddrag_medium μs μr          
                                          %
                                                                          50

                                                                            0                                        0
                                                                             20        40          60         80     100
                                                                                                   b
                                                                                               bmax %
    v s  v s_power

                                                                           30

                         
                   spin vs b ddrag_short μs μr                    20
                                     rps

                         
                   spin vs b ddrag_medium μs μr           
                                                                           10
I                                      rps

                         
                   spin vs b ddrag_long μs μr   
                                     rps
                                                                            0                              0

                                                                       10
                                                                          20        40      60       80    100
                                                                                            b
                                                                                          bmax %

                                                                           150

                             
                       ratio vs b ddrag_short μs μr               100
                                        %

                             
                       ratio vs b ddrag_medium μs μr           
                                                                            50
                                           %
J
                             
                       ratio vs b ddrag_long μs μr   
                                        %
                                                                                0                              0

                                                                            50
                                                                               20    40         60    80       100
                                                                                                b
                                                                                           bmax %
Useful conclusions from the graphs above, which are consistent with generally
accepted "best practices" and good-player intuition:

        1.   Generally, to get more spin at contact with the OB, you must hit the CB
             harder and lower. However, as you approach the miscue limit, you get a
             smaller gain in spin. And for longer drag distance shots, the amount of
             spin actually decreases as you approach the miscue limit (see Graphs A
             and I). See TP B.8 for more info and results.

        2.   More tip offset results in a greater spin-to-speed ratio at OB contact (except
             for long drag shots, especially if conditions are "sticky") (see Graphs B and J).
             So to get a better spin-to-speed ratio, hit as low as you can on the CB without
             being at too high a risk of miscuing.
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/trajectory_of_a_billiard_ball_and_recovery_of_its_initial_velocities.pdf
title: Trajectory of a Billiard Ball and Recovery of Its Initial Velocities
topics: collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
Trajectory of a Billiard Ball and Recovery of Its Initial Velocities
                Yan-Bin Jia                    Matthew T. Mason and Michael A. Erdmann
      Department of Computer Science                  School of Computer Science
           Iowa State University                      Carnegie Mellon University
           Ames, IA 50010, USA                        Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
             jia@iastate.edu                           {mason+,me}@cs.cmu.edu

1     Billiard Trajectory
What trajectory will a billiard ball follow on a pool table? Suppose it has initial velocity v 0 and
angular velocity ω 0 . Assume no bouncing of the ball. It will first slide from its initial location x0
until the contact velocity reduces to zero at some location x1 . Then it will roll without slip to a
stop at another location x2 . In this appendix, we will show that the billiard trajectory consists of
a parabolic segment from sliding and a line segment from rolling without slip. The trajectory is
illustrated in Figure 1.
                                                Let m and R be the mass and radius of the billiard
                                            ball. The ball has the moment of inertia 52 mR2 . Its
                             ω              angular inertia Q is 52 mR2 times the identity matrix.
                                            Denote by g > 0 the magnitude of the gravitational
                             v              acceleration.
                    R
     trajectory            u                    Let v and ω be the velocity and angular velocity
                f                           of the  billiard, respectively, during the motion. The
                                            velocity at its contact point with the table, also referred
Figure 2: Contact velocity u of a billiard
                                            to as the sliding velocity, is
and contact frictional force f .
                                                                 u = v + Rẑ × ω,                  (1)

where ẑ = (0, 0, 1) is the upward normal of the table. Due to its cross product with ẑ, the z-
component of ω will have no effect over the ball trajectory. So it is ignored. As mentioned earlier,
we also ignore any bouncing effect of the ball. So our analysis will make the following assumption:

       v and ω have no components in the z-direction.

1.1     Sliding
The sliding velocity u lies completely in the table plane. Sliding starts when

                                         u0 = v 0 + Rẑ × ω 0                                      (2)

is not zero. Denote the direction of u by the unit vector û. The ball is subject to a frictional force
f = −µs mgû, where µs is the coefficient of sliding friction. The ball’s dynamics are governed by

                                                  1
                                                                            x2 at t2
                                                            Rolling
                          ω0

                     x0             Sliding
                                                 x1 at t1
                               v0

           Figure 1: Trajectory of a billiard with initial velocity v 0 and angular velocity ω 0 .

two equations:

                                                mv̇ = −µs mgû,
                               Qω̇ + ω × (Qω) = Qω̇
                                                2
                                              =   mR2 ω̇
                                                5
                                              = (−Rẑ) × (−µs mgû)
                                                     = µs mgRẑ × û.

Immediately, we obtain the ball’s acceleration and angular acceleration:

                                              v̇ = −µs gû,                                          (3)
                                                    5
                                              ω̇ =    µs gẑ × û.                                   (4)
                                                   2R
   We derive the contact acceleration by differentiating (1) and substituting (3) and (4) in:
                                                   5
                                    u̇ = −µs gû + µs gẑ × (ẑ × û)
                                                   2
                                                   5
                                       = −µs gû + µs g((ẑ · û)ẑ − û)
                                                   2
                                          7
                                       = − µs gû,                                                   (5)
                                          2
since ẑ · û = 0. So we infer that u̇ is opposite to the initial contact velocity u0 . Consequently, u
will never change its direction until it becomes zero. From now on, û = u0 /ku0 k represents the
constant sliding direction. Integration of (5) yields the sliding velocity:
                                                       7
                                               u = u0 − µs gtû.                                     (6)
                                                       2
Since û is constant, we easily integrate (3) and (4):

                                        v = v 0 − µs gtû,                                           (7)
                                                   5
                                        ω = ω0 +      µs gtẑ × û.                                  (8)
                                                  2R
Equations (7) and (8) were also derived in [1, pp. 10–11].

                                                        2
   The sliding trajectory is obtained from one more round of integration — of (7):
                                           !
                                        x                     1
                                 x=             = x0 + v 0 t − µs gt2 û.                            (9)
                                        y                     2

Sliding ends when the contact velocity u reduces to zero. From (6) this takes place at time

                                                      2 ku0 k
                                               t1 =    ·      .                                     (10)
                                                      7 µs g
When it happens, the ball has the following velocity from (7):

                                                               2 ku0 k
                                      v 1 = v 0 − µs g ·               û
                                                               7 µs g
                                                    2
                                            = v 0 − u0
                                                    7
                                              5       2
                                            =   v0 − Rẑ × ω 0 ,                                    (11)
                                              7       7
by (2). Let ω 1 be the angular velocity at t1 . We take the cross product of ẑ with both sides of
v 1 + Rẑ × ω 1 = 0, obtaining
                                                 1
                                           ω1 = z × v1 ,                                      (12)
                                                 R
Substitution of (10) into (9) indicates that the ball will end sliding at the position

                                       2 kv 0 + Rẑ × ω 0 k
                          x1 = x0 +      ·                  (6v 0 − Rẑ × ω 0 ).                    (13)
                                      49        µs g

1.2   Pure Rolling
That u = 0 at time t1 implies v 1 · ω 1 = 0 via cross product of v with (1). It is possible that t1 = 0.
At t1 , since ω 1 is orthogonal to v 1 , the frictional force opposes the direction of v1 . Hence neither
ω nor v will change its direction from t1 and on. The ball begins pure rolling without slip until it
comes to rest; and u = 0 holds as it rolls.
   The rolling trajectory is a straight line segment. To derive the deceleration of the ball, we adopt
Marlow’s treatment [1, p. 12] based on the principle of energy dissipation. Because the ball rolls
on a line, we can now denote its velocity and angular velocity by their magnitudes v and ω with
no ambiguity. Since v = Rω under pure rolling, the energy of the ball is
                                               1         1 2
                                                                     
                                    E =          mv 2 + ·    mR2 ω 2
                                               2         2 5
                                                7
                                       =          mv 2 .
                                               10
Differentiate the above equation:
                                                   7
                                                Ė = mv v̇.                                        (14)
                                                   5
   Let µr be the coefficient of rolling friction. The energy dissipation due to rolling friction is

                                               Ė = −µr mgv.                                        (15)

                                                       3
Comparing (14) and (15), we obtain the deceleration of the rolling ball:
                                                    5
                                              v̇ = − µr g.                                         (16)
                                                    7
Thus the velocity magnitude varies as the ball rolls according to
                                                   5
                                       v = kv 1 k − µr g(t − t1 ).
                                                   7
The ball will come to stop at time
                                                       7 kv 1 k
                                           t2 = t1 +            .                                  (17)
                                                       5 µr g
   In the vector forms, the ball velocities during the rolling over time [t1 , t2 ] are given as
                                                5
                                     v = v 1 − µr g(t − t1 )v̂ 1 ,
                                                7
                                         1
                                     ω =    ẑ × v,
                                         R
where v̂ 1 is the unit vector in the direction of v 1 . Integrating the velocity equation above yields
the line trajectory of the rolling ball:
                                                         5
                              x = x1 + (t − t1 )v 1 −      µr g(t − t1 )2 v̂ 1 .                   (18)
                                                        14
Plugging (17) into the above equation, the ball will come to rest at the location

                                                    7 kv 1 k
                                       x2 = x1 +     ·       v1 .                                  (19)
                                                   10 µr g

1.3   Parabolic Sliding Trajectory
Under sliding, v 0 · ω 0 6= 0; hence v 0 × u0 6= 0 by (2). We take the cross products of û with both
sides of the sliding trajectory equation (9), obtaining the time when the ball reaches the location x:

                                                  ∆x × û
                                             t=            ,
                                                  v 0 × û
where ∆x = x − x0 . Here, cross products are treated as scalars along the z-axis. Substitution of t
back into (9) gives rise to a pair of equations:
                                                                              2
                                          ∆x × û 1         ∆x × û
                                                                    
                           x = x0 + v 0 ·          − µs gû                        .               (20)
                                          v 0 × û  2       v 0 × û
The first equation of the pair is an identity over the x-coordinate. The second equation of the pair,
y = x · (0, 1)T relates the y-coordinate to the x-coordinate of every point on the trajectory. Hence
it is the implicit equation of the sliding trajectory, which is a parabola as stated in the following
claim.

                                                   4
Theorem 1 The sliding trajectory of a billiard ball that starts at the location x0 with initial velocity
v 0 and angular velocity ω 0 , all planar and v 0 · ω 0 6= 0, is part of a parabola that results from the
parabola
                                                    µs g
                                          y=                 x2
                                              2kv 0 × ûk2
via a rotation about the origin through φ + π/2, where û = (cos φ, sin φ)T , followed by a translation
of
                                        v 0 · û       1
                                                                   
                                   x0 +           v 0 − (v 0 · û)û .
                                         µs g          2

Proof We first determine the point on the trajectory with the maximum curvature. This would
be the vertex if the curve turns out to be a parabola. The curvature function computed from the
parametric form (9) is
                                       ẋ × ẍ       µs gv 0 × û
                                  κ=        3
                                               =−                  .                       (21)
                                        kẋk      kv 0 − µs gtûk3
We need only find the minimum of the denominator, or equivalently,
the minimum speed of the billiard since v = v 0 −µs gtû according to (7). û
Minimization of                                                                   v∗
                 v · v = v 0 · v 0 − 2µs g(v 0 · û)t + µ2s g2 t2
                                                                                       x∗
yields the parameter value
                                         v 0 · û
                                 t∗ =             .                            (22)
                                          µs g                                        x0
Substitution of t∗ into (9) then yields
                                               v 0 · û
                                                           
                                                                1              Figure 3: Parabolic sliding
                                                                               
                                    x = x0 +
                                     ∗
                                                         v 0 − (v 0 · û)û .  trajectory with vertex x∗ .
                                                 µs g           2
Here, x∗ is the translation we need.
     The orientation of the curve is indicated by the velocity vector (7) at t∗ determined as v ∗ =
v 0 −(v 0 · û)û, which is tangent to the curve. See Figure 3. In other words, the tangent is orthogonal
to û = (cos φ, sin φ). Furthermore, since
                                                         1
                                     (x∗ − x0 ) · û =        (v 0 · û)2 > 0,
                                                        2µs g
the curve bends away from u. This implies that φ + π/2 is the desired rotation. Applying the
rotation to the implicit equation (i.e., second in (20)) yields the ordinate as a quadratic function of
the abscissa. Thus the curve is a parabola with vertex at x∗ and axis of symmetry in the direction
−û.
    Finally, we decide the canonical form y = ax2 of the parabola. Its curvature 2a at the vertex
must be equal to the curvature value (21) at t∗ . So we obtain
                                                          µs gkv 0 × ûk
                                           a =
                                                      2kv 0 − (v 0 · û)ûk3
                                                      µs g kv 0 × ûk
                                                =          ·
                                                       2 kv 0 × ûk3
                                                           µs g
                                                =                   .
                                                      2kv 0 × ûk2

                                                            5
1.4    Straight Sliding Trajectory
When v0 ⊥ ω 0 , the ball slides along a straight trajectory. It is more convenient to treat the case
in terms of two orthogonal directions î and ĵ such that î × ĵ = ẑ. The direction î is of v 0 if v 0 6= 0
and otherwise it is of ω 0 × ẑ. For convenience, we write ω 0 = ω0 ĵ, v k = vk î, for k = 0, 1, and
xl = xl î for l = 0, 1, 2. Note that v0 ≥ 0. Without loss of generality, we let î point to the right.
Then ĵ points inward to make ẑ upward. Hence ω < 0 for a counterclockwise rotation; and ω > 0
for a clockwise rotation. The contact velocity and the path of the ball are also collinear with i.
The initial sliding velocity by (2) becomes

                                         u0 = u0 î = (v0 − Rω0 )î.                                     (23)

If v0 < Rω0 , û0 opposes the initial velocity which consequently increases under sliding friction.
    Recall that t1 and t2 are the times at which sliding and rolling ends, respectively. Equations (13),
(11), (10), (19), and (17) now respectively become:
                                               2
                            x1 − x0 =             |v0 − Rω0 |(6v0 + Rω0 ),                               (24)
                                           49µs g
                                           1
                                  v1 =       (5v0 + 2Rω0 ),                                              (25)
                                           7
                                           2 |v0 − Rω0 |
                                   t1 =       ·             ,                                            (26)
                                           7       µs g
                                               1
                            x2 − x1 =             |5v0 + 2Rω0 |(5v0 + 2Rω0 ),                            (27)
                                           70µr g
                                                   1
                                   t2 =    t1 +        |5v0 + 2Rω0 |.                                    (28)
                                                 5µr g

Suppose the ball’s velocity v becomes zero at time t3 and location x3 = x3 î. If this happens during
sliding, then we infer from (7) that v 0 and û are in the same direction, namely, v0 ≥ Rω0 . In this
case, from (7) and (9) we have
                                                            v0
                                                  t3 =          ,                                        (29)
                                                           µs g
                                                           1 v02
                                           x3 − x0 =              .                                      (30)
                                                           2 µs g
    The rest follows from a case-based analysis that measures Rω0 in terms of v0 . The five cases
are illustrated in Figure 4.

 (1) Rω0 < − 52 v0 . Hence Rω0 > v0 . This implies 0 < t3 < t1 by (26) and (29), and therefore
     x1 < x3 . From (23) v 0 and u0 are in the same direction. The ball will reverse its motion at
     x3 = v02 /2µs g before sliding ends. We also have x2 < x1 by (27).

 (2) Rω0 = − 52 v0 . The ball has zero velocity and thus zero angular velocity when sliding ends.
     There is no pure rolling phase with x1 = x2 = x3 and t1 = t2 = t3 = v0 /µs g.

                                                      6
                                                                    ω0                                                  ω1                   ω3

         (2)                       (4)                                                   v0
  (1)                    (3)             (5)
                                                                                        u0
                                                         Rω0                                                                                      x3
                                    v0                                        x0                    x2                        x1
        − 25 v0                0
                                                                                                  v=ω=0                      u=0                 v=0

                                                                                              0        t3     t1        t2

                                                                                                              (1)

  ω0                                                                ω0                                      ω1 > ω0

                                                                                         v0
                    v0
                                                                                   u0
               u0
   x0                                     x1 = x2 = x3               x0                                            x1                  x2 = x3

           0             t1 = t2 = t3                                                             0           t1        t2 = t3

                          (2)                                                                                (3)

  ω0
                                                                     ω0                       0 < ω1 < ω0

                    v0
           u0 = 0                                                        v0
x0 = x1                                        x2 = x3
                                                               u0    x0                           x1                                   x2 = x3

               t1 = 0          t2 = t3
                                                                                                  0            t1            t2 = t3

                           (4)                                                                                (5)

Figure 4: Five scenarios (1)–(5) of straight billiard motion based on Rω0 relative to v0 shown in the upper
left corner.

                                                                    7
 (3) − 52 v0 < Rω0 < v0 . So the initial sliding velocity u0 > 0. In this case, t3 > t1 ; that is, the
     ball’s velocity reduces to zero after sliding ends. This implies that t2 = t3 . The frictional
     force increases ω during sliding.

 (4) Rω0 = v0 . In this case, t1 = 0. The ball starts pure rolling right away.

 (5) Rω0 > v0 . Here v 0 and u0 are in opposite directions. The ball’s velocity increases while
     angular velocity decreases until v = Rω when pure rolling starts.

2        Recovering Initial Velocities from a Billiard Trajectory
From the video of a billiard motion we can reconstruct its trajectory, and estimate the locations
x0 and x1 at which the ball begins the motion and ends sliding. Based on the information, we
would like to solve for the ball’s initial velocity v 0 and angular velocity ω 0 assumed to have only x-
and y-components.1 Both velocities are in the xy-plane. The implicit equation for the trajectory,
whether a parabolic segment or a line segment, is known, from fitting, for example. When the
trajectory is a line segment, the final resting location x2 of the ball is also needed to determine the
initial velocities.

2.1        Parabolic Segment
We infer that v 0 · ω 0 6= 0. Applying standard coordinate transformation to its equation, we can
determine that the parabola is generated from a rotation of y = ax2 , a > 0, through θ followed
by a translation of x∗ = (x∗ , y ∗ ). Here, a, θ, and x∗ are known. The sliding trajectory has the
parametric form (9) dependent on v 0 , ω 0 and x0 . Take the cross product of ẑ with the initial
contact velocity u0 = v 0 + Rẑ × ω 0 :

                                      ẑ × u0 = ẑ × v 0 + R((ẑ · ω 0 )ẑ − ω 0 )
                                                 = ẑ × v 0 − Rω 0 .

This leads to
                                              1
                                                ẑ × (v 0 − u0 ).
                                                 ω0 =                                              (31)
                                              R
   We will first determine the direction û of u0 , and then v 0 and u0 . Afterward, ω 0 will be known
from (31). Let û = (cos φ, sin φ). Under Theorem 1, φ + π/2 = θ. We immediately have

                                                  π           π
                                                                 
                                û = cos θ −        , sin θ −             = (sin θ, − cos θ).                        (32)
                                                  2           2
        Next, we recover the initial velocity v0 . Denote p = x∗ − x0 . Theorem 1 states that
                                               v 0 · û     1
                                                                              
                                            p=          v0 − (v 0 · û)û .
                                                µs g        2
Take the dot products of û with both sides of the above equation, and rearrange the terms:

                                                  (v 0 · û)2 = 2µs gp · û.                                         (33)
    1
        We cannot recover the z-components of v 0 and ω 0 since they do not affect the trajectory in the horizontal plane.

                                                                 8
Meanwhile, Theorem 1 also states that
                                                                      µs g
                                                          a=                  .
                                                                  2kv 0 × uk2

Hence
                                                                          µs g
                                                          kv 0 × uk2 =         .                                    (34)
                                                                          2a
Add up equations (33) and (34):

                                             kv 0 k2 = (v 0 · û)2 + kv 0 × ûk2
                                                                          1
                                                                           
                                                     = µs g 2p · û +
                                                                         2a
This gives us the magnitude of the initial ball velocity:
                                                              s
                                                                                    1
                                                                                      
                                               kv 0 k =        µs g 2p · û +         .                             (35)
                                                                                   2a

                                                                 The direction v̂0 of v 0 must be tangent to the curve
                    θ                                         at x0 , as shown in Figure 5. We project the vector
                                                              −p = x0 −x∗ onto the direction ξ̂ = (cos θ, sin θ) of the
                                                 x            “x-axis” of the local frame of the parabola, obtaining
                        x∗
   ξ      v0                                                  the abscissa
                                                                                    ξ = −p · ξ̂.
         β
                                                              In the local frame, the tangent vector at a point
                                                              (ξ, aξ 2 ) on the parametrized parabola has the direc-
               x0                                             tion (1, 2aξ). Let β ∈ (− π2 , π2 ) be the tangential angle
                                                     x1       at x0 with respect to the ξ-axis such that

                                                                                                 (1, 2aξ)
Figure 5: Determining the orientation of ini-                                  (cos β, sin β) = p            .
tial ball velocity.                                                                              1 + 4a2 ξ 2

The initial ball velocity is in the direction
                                      (
                                          (cos(θ + β), sin(θ + β)),  if (x1 − x0 ) · ξ̂ > 0,
                             v̂ 0 =
                                          −(cos(θ + β), sin(θ + β)), otherwise.

Combining this with the magnitude (35), we have determined the initial ball velocity:
                                                          s
                                                                           1
                                                                                  
                                               v0 =        µs g 2p · û +    v̂ 0 .                                 (36)
                                                                          2a

    Now we use û and v 0 to derive the magnitude u0 of the initial contact velocity u0 . This will
give us u0 = u0 û, and subsequently ω 0 from (31). Since u0 = v0 + Rẑ × ω 0 , equation (13) can be
rewritten as
                                                2 u0
                                   x1 − x0 =           (7v 0 − u0 ).                            (37)
                                               49 µs g

                                                                      9
Take the cross products of û with both sides of the above equation:
                                                   2 u0
                               (x1 − x0 ) · û =           (7(v 0 · û) − u0 ) .
                                                   49 µs g
Rewrite the above as a quadratic equation in u0 :
                                                     49
                             u20 − 7(v 0 · û)u0 +      µs g(x1 − x0 ) · û = 0.
                                                      2
The solution to the equation is
                              7
                                         q                                        
                         u0 =   v 0 · û ± (v 0 · û)2 − 2µs g(x1 − x0 ) · û .                     (38)
                              2

In (38), the sign ‘+’ is chosen if v 0 · û ≤ 0. If v 0 · û > 0, both signs ‘+’ and ‘−’ are possible.
In this case, we need to verify the solution using (37). It can be shown by contradiction that a
unique solution exists as long as v 0 and ω 0 are not orthogonal (which is true given the parabolic
trajectory).

2.2     Line Segment
When the sliding trajectory is a line, we infer that v 0 and ω 0 must be orthogonal to each other.
Let the unit vector î be in the direction of x2 − x0 , and ĵ such that î × ĵ = ẑ. Write v 0 = v0 î,
ω 0 = ω0 ĵ, and xk = xk î for k = 0, 1, 2. Equations (24) and (27) hold for x1 − x0 and x2 − x1 ,
respectively.
    To solve for v0 and ω0 , first from (27) we obtain

                                            5v0 + 2Rω0 = C,                                         (39)

where                          p
                               70µr g(x2 − x1 ),              if x2 − x1 ≥ 0;
                           C=                                                                       (40)
                               p     − 70µr g(x1 − x2 ), if x2 − x1 < 0.
From (24) a constant D ≡ 49
                          2 µs g(x1 − x0 ) is rewritten as follows:

                     D = |v0 − Rω0 |(6v0 + Rω0 )
                                 C    5              C   5
                                                          
                       = v0 − + v0 6v0 + − v0                                      by (39)
                                 2    2              2   2
                          7        C 7        C
                                                
                       =    v0 −        v0 +                                                        (41)
                          2        2 2         2
                         
                             49  2   1  2
                              4 v0 − 4 C , if Rω0 ≤ v0 ;
                         
                       =                                                                            (42)
                          1 C 2 − 49 v 2 , if Rω > v .
                             4       4 0           0   0

Hence we solve the above for v0 :
                                        √
                                        1 C 2 + 4D, if Rω0 ≤ v0 ;
                                         7
                                v0 =                                                                (43)
                                        1 √C 2 − 4D, if Rω > v .
                                         7                 0   0

                                                      10
The initial angular velocity follows from (39):
                                                1
                                        ω0 =      (C − 5v0 ).                            (44)
                                               2R
We need to hypothesize Rω0 ≤ v0 and Rω0 > v0 respectively. Then check if the values of v0 and
ω0 according to (43) and (44) satisfy the original hypothesis. Multiple solutions may exist.

References
[1] Wayland C. Marlow. The Physics of Pocket Billiards. Marlow Advanced Systems Technologies,
    1994.

                                                  11
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/twice_plus_tenths.pdf
title: Twice Plus Tenths
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Twice Plus Tenths”                                                           ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     In a recent online video (NV L.30), I did a careful experiment to find the ideal banking lines for sliding banks
over a wide range of angles. A sliding bank is when the object ball (OB) hits the cushion with stun, meaning it
has no top or bottom spin. If the OB is frozen to or very close to the cushion, almost any speed will work since
the OB does not have time or distance to develop topspin. If the OB is farther from the cushion, fast speed is
required; otherwise, the OB would pick up topspin as it dragged across the cloth. In NV L.30, I compared
various diamond systems people use to aim sliding banks, including my 1/3-more-than-twice system, which
is the best of the previous systems. In a more-recent video (NV L.32), I present a new system that performs
even better. I discovered it by plotting the data from the careful experiment and finding an approach that best
matched the measured banking angles. If you want to see the analysis, which also compares the new system
to the others, check out TP B.27.

    The new and improved system is called the twice-plus-tenths (TPT) system (see Diagram 1). Just as
with the 1/3-more-than-twice system, everything is measured relative to the rail grooves across from the
diamonds instead of through the diamonds. The rail grooves, visible on worn cloth, are where balls sit when in
contact with the cushions. The reason why this system measures across from the diamonds instead of through
the diamonds, like many other systems, is it results in better bank accuracy over a larger range than any existing
through-diamond system.

                       Diagram 1 “Twice Plus Tenths” sliding-bank diamond system

Billiards Digest                                                                                      November, 2023
     The twice-plus-tenths system is relatively simple. The origination rail number is twice the banking rail
number plus that many tenths. For example, twice 1 is 2 and adding 2 tenths gives 2.2. Twice 1.5 is 3 and
adding 3 tenths gives 3.3, and so on. Again, the original rail number is always twice plus that many tenths. If
you prefer using 10s instead of 1s for the diamond numbers, just move the decimal place, but the numbers are
really the same (22-to-10 instead of 2.2 to 1.0, 33-to-15 instead of 3.3 to 1.5, etc.).

     A good way to learn the system is to set up and practice straight shots on each of the system lines. It can
be helpful to use the printable diamond ruler linked in the YouTube video description to visualize the tenths
until you get enough practice to do it on your own. For example, in Image 1, I’ve placed a ball at the ½ diamond
point on the banking rail. I’ve placed another ball at 1.1 on the opposite rail. These balls (which are removed
before hitting the shot) help you visualize the reference line when practicing. And as shown in Image 2, the
cue ball (CB) and 8 are placed along the 1.1-to-0.5 line. Because of the steep angle on this shot, I had to place
the 8 a little far from the rail to avoid a double kiss; but, in general, place it as close to the cushion as possible
so speed won’t be a factor. Try to hit a stop shot to make sure your aim is true. And repeat this for each of the
system tracks shown in Diagram 1, as I demonstrate in the video.

                        Image 1 Ball placed across from ½, using the diamond ruler

                              Image 2 Shot setup for 1.1-to-0.5 reference track

    Remember, this is not a through-diamond system. As shown in Image 3 (for the 4.4-to-2 reference track),
the ball is across from 2 in the rail groove. If you were aiming through the line of diamonds instead, the number
would be a little less than 1.8. Remember, the opposite rail number is always twice the banking rail number
plus that number of tenths. And the measurements are done in the rail grooves across from the diamonds, not
through the diamonds like many other systems.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       November, 2023
                             Image 3 Rail-groove aim vs. through-diamond aim

    There are several factors and effects you need to consider when using a banking system like this. First, if
your aim is off even a hair, you won’t be successful. A slight outside cut will go long, and a slight inside cut will
come up short. With a straight shot, you need to be very careful to not have any sidespin. Any sidespin on the
CB will transfer some sidespin to the OB making it miss the target. Speed has very little effect when the OB is
frozen to or very close to the cushion; but at a larger distance from the rail, faster speed is required to make the
OB slide into the cushion, as required by the system. The video demonstrates all these effects along with how
to adjust your aim when there is a cut angle on the bank.

    One message from the bank-effects section of the video is: Banks are difficult, and they should be avoided
whenever possible. Another message is: Learn and develop a feel for all the effects so you can account for
them and use them to your advantage when necessary. For more info, see the bank effects link in the video
description.

     One way to use the twice-plus-tenths system is to visualize the system reference lines and just aim between
the lines. In Image 4, the short cues on the table help you see the 3.3-to-1.5 and 4.4-to-2 lines. Because the
8 is right between these two lines, you just need to aim in the middle. The video demonstrates how to use your
playing cue to visualize all of this while playing.

                                      Image 4 Aiming between the lines

Billiards Digest                                                                                      November, 2023
     Another way to use the system is with numbers. If the OB is close to the cushion, it is easy to estimate
where it will hit the cushion. Even if your approximation for the banking line is off, your estimate for where the
ball will hit the cushion will still be good. For example, in Image 5, the 8 will hit the cushion very close to 1 3/4
or 1.75. Twice that is 3 1/2 or 3.5. Add between 3 and 4 tenths to arrive at a little more than 3.8.

                                            Image 5 Calculation example

    Online video NV L.32 includes game-situation examples so you can see the system being applied
effectively for a wide range of banks, including long banks off end rails. I hope you find the new twice-plus-
tenths system helpful in your game. It is very accurate and works well over a wide range of angles, and you
can take that to the bank!

      Good luck with your game from Dr. Dave!

                     NV L.30 – SLIDING BANK SHOT DIAMOND SYSTEMS … How to Aim Banks at Fast-Speed
                         or Close-to-the-Cushion
   normal video      NV L.32 – TWICE-PLUS-TENTH … The Most Useful Bank Shot Diamond System You’ll Ever
                         Learn

                     TP B.27 – Sliding Bank System Comparison
   technical proof

PS:
      •     I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
            with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
            to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        November, 2023
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/using_your_cue_to_aim.pdf
title: Using Your Cue To Aim
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“Using Your Cue to Aim”                                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all past articles are available online at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     Recently, I posted online video NV J.75 demonstrating 12 ways to use a pool cue to help you aim
different types of shots, each of which is described below.

1. Visualize the Contact Point
    For some people, it can help to visualize the required contact point on the object ball (OB) by using the
cue to imagine shooting the OB directly into the pocket. Then, in the shooting position, you need to visualize
where to send the cue ball (CB) to create the necessary contact point.

2. See the Angle
     Some people just need to “see the angle” to be able to aim effectively and know how much of the OB to
hit. In the video, I show how to use the cue to visualize the line to the pocket and the required shot line and
angle. This technique can be especially useful with long back-cuts which most people tend to overcut,
especially if they do not visualize the angle and aim while standing.

3. Visualize a Ghost Rail
    Some shots, especially back-cuts with the OB in the middle of the table, can be difficult to visualize since
there is no nearby rail to serve as a visual reference. In these cases, you can use the cue to simulate the rail.
As shown in Image 1, just place the cue along the edge of the OB to the edge of the pocket, mimicking a
ghost rail. Now you can aim the shot just like you aim a rail cut shot, with the cue pointing the way to the
pocket.

                                              Image 1 Ghost rail

Billiards Digest                                                                                      August, 2021
4. Visualize the Ghost Ball
     The ghost ball is the imaginary position the CB needs to be at OB contact to create the necessary OB line
to the pocket. if you place a ball at the required ghost ball position, you can practice visualizing the required
aim both while standing and while down in the shot. You can also tap down on the ball to make a mark on the
cloth. Now you have a precise aim point to target. You can also place a self-adhesive hole-reinforcement
label (“donut” or “sticky”) to make the target point even more clear. As demonstrated in the video, by placing
the cue over the CB with the tip in the center of the donut, you can clearly see the required line of aim of the
shot. And you can use the same marked OB and ghost-ball positions to practice shots of many different cut
angles.

5. Aim with Cue Pivot
     Image 2 shows a simple way to use the cue to help you aim fairly accurately. First place the tip at the
center of the required ghost ball position, with the cue pointing at the pocket (see Image 2a). With an
accurately-placed donut, you can practice judging how close the tip needs to be to the OB to locate the center
of the ghost ball. Try to remember how big the gap looks, or just remember that the tip needs to be half a
ball’s diameter in front of the OB. Now pivot the cue to the center of the CB (see Image 2b). This gives you
the required line of aim of the shot. When you pivot the cue, it helps to apply downward pressure on the cue
to prevent the tip from sliding during the pivot. After the pivot, it can help to pick a spot on the cloth or a far
point on the rail as a precise aim target. Alternatively, you can just visualize where the line of aim is relative
to the edge of the OB.

                         (a) before pivot                                 (b) after pivot)

                                            Image 2 Cue pivot aim

Billiards Digest                                                                                       August, 2021
6. Visualize the Tangent Line
     The cue can also be useful to visualize CB direction after the hit. For a stun shot, where the CB has no
top of bottom spin when it arrives at the OB, the CB heads down the tangent-line direction, which is
perpendicular to the OB’s line to the pocket. This is called the 90˚ rule. One way to visualize the tangent line
is to position the joint over the ghost-ball position, with the cue pointing to the pocket. The joint surfaces are
perpendicular to the cue, so the joint points down the tangent line. As shown in Image 3, you can also do this
in reverse, pointing the joint at the pocket, in which case the cue points down the tangent line.

                                             Image 3 Tangent line

     As demonstrated in the video, another way to visualize the tangent line is to hold the cue over the ghost-
ball position in an orientation that would be required to push the OB into the pocket. Another approach is to
point at the pocket with the tip in the ghost-ball position and just visualize the perpendicular direction like the
top of a capital letter “T.”

7. Visualize the Natural Angle
      If you have watched some of my past videos, you probably know about my 30˚ rule peace-sign technique
used to visualize the natural angle on rolling-CB shots. If you point one finger in the initial CB direction, the
other finger will point in the final CB direction. In the video, I demonstrate how you can move your head from
the first finger line to the second to accurately visualize the final CB direction. When some people try to do
this, they rotate the fingers, which results in big errors. If you have this problem, leave your head along the
initial CB line and place your cue over the 2nd finger to clearly see the expected CB direction (see Image 4).

Billiards Digest                                                                                       August, 2021
                                            Image 4 Natural angle

8. Bob’s Natural Angle Cue Trick
     In online video NV J.76, I show several alternative ways to use the cue to predict rolling-CB carom angle
direction for cuts of any angle. One of the methods demonstrated in the video is from fellow columnist Bob
Jewett. Assuming you have a standard 58” cue, you first need to mark or remember the 34” spot (measured
from the tip). First place the tip over the ghost-ball position with the cue over the CB. Then pivot the butt of
the cue toward the shot 90˚ about the 34” point. Now a line through the butt and ghost-ball position will point
in the natural-angle direction. For illustrations, demonstrations, and more information, see the Rolling CB
Carom Angle (RCA) FAQ page at billiards.colostate.edu.

9. Visualize Draw Shot Direction
    For those who have seen or used my three-times-the-angle system, you know the cue can also be used
to predict CB direction for draw shots. If you visualize the cut angle between the CB and the line to the
pocket, you just need to duplicate this angle twice to find the direction the CB will head for a good-action draw
shot. The cue can be used to visualize everything. For demonstrations and more information, see the 3-
times-the-angle draw shot system FAQ page at billiards.colostate.edu.

10. Visualize Full-Hit CB Direction
     Another three-times-the-angle system applies to predicting CB direction for full hits. The 30˚-rule peace
sign is used only for cut shots between a ¼-ball and ¾-ball hit. With a hit fuller than ¾-ball, use the cue to
measure off the cut angle pivoting with the tip at the ghost ball position. Then duplicate this angle 3 times in
the direction of CB motion to predict where the rolling-CB will head. For demonstrations and more
information, see the full-hit CB control FAQ page at billiards.colostate.edu.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      August, 2021
11. Visualize Extended Diamond Distances
     With some kick and bank shot aiming systems, you need to be able to count diamond distances beyond
the table, and you can use your cue to help with this. I show an example in the video where I am using my
1/3-more-than-twice bank-shot diamond system to bank an OB straight back off the end rail. The OB will
hit the end rail at the 2-diamond point, so the CB must hit the OB along a line coming from 1/3-more than 4
diamonds from the target pocket. The two-diamond point is easy to see, but the 4th diamond, and 1/3 more
than 4 is difficult to see because they aren’t marked on the table. As demonstrated in the video, the cue
makes it easy. Just measure off 2 and 1/3 diamonds on the cue, shift the tip to the 2nd diamond, and you
have the answer.

12. Visualize 1-Rail Kicks
     The cue can also be used to aim 1-rail kicks. As shown in Image 5, I need to kick across table to pocket
the 9 in the side and get a shot at the 8 for the win. Start by choosing an aim point for where you want the CB
to go. Then place your cue over this point with the tip along the diamonds of the kicking rail. Then pivot the
cue until the tip is exactly in between the CB position and the part of the cue adjacent to the CB. For most
pool tables, this gives you the required aim point on the rail for a rolling CB. In the video, I also show another
way to use your cue to get the required line of aim. First measure the distance from the CB to the line of
diamonds. Then mirror this distance to the other side of the rail by moving the tip to the line of diamonds.
Now look from your measured point on the cue to the desired target to get the required point of aim on the
rail. Both approaches give the same answer.

                                              Image 5 1-Rail kick

Billiards Digest                                                                                      August, 2021
    As online video NV J.75 shows, the cue can be a very useful tool to help you visualize aim for a wide
range of shots. Be sure to watch the video and give everything a try at the table to see if you find any of the
techniques useful. Reading is good … watching is better …but doing is best.

      Good luck with your game from Dr. Dave!

                    NV J.75 – 12 Ways to AIM WITH A POOL CUE
normal video
                    NV J.76 – Rolling-Cue-Ball CAROM ANGLE Systems

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      August, 2021
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veeb_part_i_pocket_blockers.pdf
title: VEEB Part I Pocket Blockers
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEEB – Part I: Pocket Blockers”                                             ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources on a DVD. Details can be found online at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the first article in a series dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB),” a five-disc
instructional-DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett. VEEB teaches all of the
skills, knowledge and strategy one needs to excel at 8-ball. Topics include offensive and defensive strategy,
position play, shot types, safety play, advanced shots, and run-out planning. An outline of the entire VEEB series
along with video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/8-ball.

     The topic for this month is how to deal with various pocket-blocker situations that can come up in 8-ball. It is
very common for balls to be blocking pockets in 8-ball, especially on a “bar box” that has limited “real estate” for
15 balls. Diagram 1 illustrates an example where we are shooting solids and the 11 blocks the corner from both
the 1 and 8. A good approach here is to carom the cue ball (CB) off the 2 into the 11 to remove it as a blocker
and leave short-side shape on the 1 in the opposite corner. Pocketing the 11 also opens the pocket for the 8
later. On this shot, the tangent line heads in the perfect direction, so a hit a touch below center at medium speed
results in perfect stun along the 90-degree direction to the 11. With the 11 clear and the final CB position as
shown in the diagram, the solids can now be run, starting with the 1.

                             Diagram 1 Clear a pocket blocker for short-side shape

     Diagram 2 shows another example where the 10 ball blocks the corner for the 1. When an opponent’s ball is
this deep in a pocket, often a good option is to pocket a ball by driving it through the blocker, especially when
there is a straight-in shot opportunity like the 4 ball here. The key is to hit the blocker as squarely as possible with
a rolling object ball (OB), so it will follow straight in. Here, since the 10 is in the left side of the pocket, the aim
should slightly favor the right side of the center of the 10 because if the 4 hits to the left of center even a hair, it
won’t follow into the pocket. We can also “hedge our bets” by hitting a stop shot in case we miss the shot …
these shots are more difficult than they can look. With a stop shot, if the 4 isn’t pocketed, the only stripe the
opponent will have as an option is the difficult 11, since the solids block all other stripes. But we expect to make
this shot and run out the solids. Remember to not use too much speed on shots like this. If you do, the OB won’t
have time to develop enough forward roll to follow the obstacle into the pocket.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     November, 2015
                               Diagram 2 Drive a ball through a pocket blocker

    Diagram 3 illustrates another example, playing solids, where the 12 blocks both the 3 and 5. A good
approach here is to attempt to drive the 5 though the 12. This would require a really good hit; but, fortunately,
even if we don’t pocket the 5, we can still come out good. We just need the replace the blocker with the 5, and
play safe at the same time for an excellent two-way shot. With the CB left as shown in the diagram on the rail
behind the 13, our opponent doesn’t have a reasonable shot at a stripe, and if the 13 isn’t sent up table, our 5 is
now a pocket blocker. Regardless, if we get another open shot, which is very likely to occur, the run-out will be
easy.

                              Diagram 3 Replace a pocket blocker and play safe

     Demonstrations of all of the shots in this article can be viewed in online video NV G.2, and the VEEB-I DVD
includes many more game-situation examples dealing with post-break analysis, opening-shot options, choosing
key balls, position planning, solving problems, safeties and two-way shots. As always, you should check out the
videos and try the shots yourself the next time you are at a table. Reading is good, and watching is better, but
trying is best.

Billiards Digest                                                                                 November, 2015
     I hope you enjoy my series of articles dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB).” If you want
to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV G.1 through NV G.11. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV G.1 – Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB) Overview
                    NV G.2 – How to Deal With Pocket Blockers in 8-ball, from Disc I of VEEB
                    NV G.3 – How to Select Key Balls in 8-ball, from Disc I of VEEB
                    NV G.4 – How to Use Cue Ball Drag to Enhance Sidespin in 8-ball, from Disc II of VEEB
                    NV G.5 – How to Use Spin-Induced Throw to Hold the Cue Ball in 8-ball, from Disc II of VEEB
                    NV G.6 – How to Come Into the Line of Blockers When Playing Safeties, from Disc III of VEEB
normal video        NV G.7 – Various Straight-In Shot Options in 8-ball, from Disc III of VEEB
                    NV G.8 – How to Deal with an End-Game Ball Tied Up with the 8-ball, from Disc IV of VEEB
                    NV G.9 – 2nd-Ball 8-ball Break, from Disc IV of VEEB
                    NV G.10 – Rack 8 Run-Out Example from Disc V of VEEB
                    NV G.11 – Rack 9 Run-Out Example from Disc V of VEEB

PS:
              I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
               with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
               the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),”
“How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        November, 2015
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veeb_part_ii_selecting_key_balls.pdf
title: VEEB Part Ii Selecting Key Balls
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEEB – Part II: Selecting Key Balls”                                         ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources on a DVD. Details can be found online at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the second article in a series dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB),” a five-disc
instructional-DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett. VEEB teaches all of the
skills, knowledge and strategy one needs to excel at 8-ball. Topics include offensive and defensive strategy,
position play, shot types, safety play, advanced shots, and run-out planning. An outline of the entire VEEB series
along with video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/8-ball.

    After selecting solids or stripes, and after checking for and developing plans for any problem balls, an
important step before beginning an 8-ball run-out is choosing a key ball for the 8. This is the last ball to be
pocketed before the 8 that results in good position for an easy 8-ball shot for the win. Diagram 1 illustrates an
example where stripes is the best choice. There are no problem balls, and it is easy to get on the 8 ball, even
though the 2 and 4 balls do limit access to and block pockets for the 8. A good key ball for the 8 is the 15 since a
stop shot on the 15 results in perfect position on the 8 in the bottom-right corner. The 10 ball is a good key ball to
get on the 15 ball. Almost any angle into the 10 can result in near straight position for the key 15-ball shot.

                   Diagram 1 Dealing with potential problem ball early to set up for the best key ball

      Even though there are no real problem balls in this rack, the 12 can be slightly troublesome since other balls
(the 2, 4, 8, 9, or 15) can be hit if we don’t get a good angle for the 12-ball shot. It is best to avoid moving balls if
it is not required or natural. As shown in the diagram, a good start in this layout is the 9, then the 12, and then the
11 and 13, leaving the 10 as the key ball for the 15 as the key ball for the 8. Starting with the 12 is also a good
option since we can get a similar cue ball (CB) path from the starting CB position as with the 12-ball shot shown in
the diagram. With this layout, center-table position for the CB (after the 12-ball shot) offers many options.
Regardless of the exact ball-order chosen, the final stop shot on the key 15 ball leaves a very easy shot on the 8
for the win.

    Sometimes what might appear to be a good key ball isn’t always the best choice. Diagram 2 illustrates an
example where this is the case, shooting stripes. The 13 might seem to be a good key ball choice to get on the 8
with a simple follow shot through the gap between the 2 and 6. However, with the 2, 6 and 7 where they are, this

Billiards Digest                                                                                      December, 2015
choice can be problematic. Even if we get good position on the 11 as a key ball for the 13, we would still need to
be very careful. For example, if you were to leave the CB at position C-1 for the final 13-ball shot, the 2 presents
a problem since it blocks the natural path forward to a shot on the 8. And if the CB were instead left in position C-
2 for the 13, both the 6 and 7 present potential problems. A better approach from the beginning might be to avoid
the 13 as a key ball for the 8 since it does require fairly tight position control. One good plan, as shown in the
diagram, is to take care of the 10, 11 and 13 first, and then use the 9 and 14 to approach the 8 from below. This
pattern requires very little CB motion, which is often a sign of a good plan. Reducing CB motion automatically
reduces error in CB positioning since there is less motion over which error can occur. This pattern does result in
a longer shot on the 8, as compared to following forward on the 13 to the 8, but the run-out is fairly safe and
straightforward.

                              Diagram 2 Don’t choose a key ball requiring tight position

     Demonstrations of all of the shots in this article can be viewed in online video NV G.3, and the VEEB-I DVD
includes many more game-situation examples dealing with post-break analysis, opening-shot options, choosing
key balls, position planning, solving problems, safeties and two-way shots. As always, you should check out the
videos and try the shots yourself the next time you are at a table. Reading is good, and watching is better, but
trying is best.

     I hope you enjoy my series of articles dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB).” If you want
to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV G.1 through NV G.11. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV G.1 – Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB) Overview
                   NV G.2 – How to Deal With Pocket Blockers in 8-ball, from Disc I of VEEB
                   NV G.3 – How to Select Key Balls in 8-ball, from Disc I of VEEB
                   NV G.4 – How to Use Cue Ball Drag to Enhance Sidespin in 8-ball, from Disc II of VEEB
                   NV G.5 – How to Use Spin-Induced Throw to Hold the Cue Ball in 8-ball, from Disc II of VEEB
                   NV G.6 – How to Come Into the Line of Blockers When Playing Safeties, from Disc III of VEEB
normal video       NV G.7 – Various Straight-In Shot Options in 8-ball, from Disc III of VEEB
                   NV G.8 – How to Deal with an End-Game Ball Tied Up with the 8-ball, from Disc IV of VEEB
                   NV G.9 – 2nd-Ball 8-ball Break, from Disc IV of VEEB
                   NV G.10 – Rack 8 Run-Out Example from Disc V of VEEB
                   NV G.11 – Rack 9 Run-Out Example from Disc V of VEEB

Billiards Digest                                                                                   December, 2015
PS:
      •   I am happy to announce that my entire collection of instructional DVDs (23 total to date) is now available
          for streaming via YouTube. For more info, see: dr-dave-billiards.com/stream.html.
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
          with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
          the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the Video Encyclopedias of “Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Pool Practice (VEPP),” and “Eight Ball
(VEEB),” and the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD
series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   December, 2015
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veeb_part_iii_drag_enhanced_sidespin.pdf
title: VEEB Part Iii Drag Enhanced Sidespin
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEEB – Part III: Drag-Enhanced Sidespin”                                 ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources on a DVD. Details can be found online at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the third article in a series dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB),” a five-disc
instructional-DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett. VEEB teaches all of the
skills, knowledge and strategy one needs to excel at 8-ball. Topics include offensive and defensive strategy,
position play, shot types, safety play, advanced shots, and run-out planning. An outline of the entire VEEB series
along with video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/8-ball.

     As shown in Diagram 1, sometimes we need to create a very larger rebound-angle change off a cushion to
achieve position. Here, we need to lengthen the angle as much as possible to go forward past all of the obstacle
stripes to the 8. To get the maximum effect of sidespin, it helps to use cue ball (CB) drag by hitting below center
of the CB, with sidespin. The CB starts off sliding some, and this sliding slows the CB. This is called drag.
During drag, the CB develops forward roll and doesn’t lose much sidespin in the process. Because the CB’s
forward speed has slowed, but the spin hasn’t changed much, the angle off the cushion will go longer than it
would be otherwise.

                           Diagram 1 Using drag spin for position past obstacles

    Diagram 2 shows another example where we need to pocket the 4 and have the CB rebound long enough to
break out the 5-7 cluster. To an inexperienced eye, it might seem difficult or impossible to get an angle this
shallow off the rail; but with a drag shot, the intensified sidespin can easily accomplish the break out. Remember,
start the CB sliding and use CB drag to intensify the effects of sidespin.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   January, 2016
                                 Diagram 2 Using drag spin for a break-out shot

     Generally, to get more spin on the CB, you hit farther from center. It also helps to have a good tip that is
shaped and chalked properly. Diagram 3 illustrates the miscue limit, the farthest your can hit from CB center
without having the tip slip off the CB. With typical equipment, the miscue limit is at half of the ball’s radius from
center A striped ball can useful to practice miscue-limit visualization because the width of the stripe on a standard
ball is half the ball's diameter, so the edges of the stripe border the typical miscue limit.

                                       Diagram 3 Miscue limit visualization

     As mentioned above, to achieve the most effect from sidespin, you want to use a drag shot. Online video NV
B.10 illustrates how sidespin persists as the CB’s backspin converts to stun and then forward roll due to drag.
The ideal tip contact point to get the largest effective sidespin is illustrated in Diagram 4. It is at the intersection
of the miscue-limit circle (red) and the base circle (blue) of equal size going through the center and resting point of
the CB. The tip isn't as far from the vertical centerline of the CB as it would be at the miscue limit on the
horizontal centerline (equator) of the CB, so the initial spin won't be maximum; but the drag action created by the
bottom spin increases the effective amount of sidespin due to the drag slowing. This tip contact point results in
the largest effective sidespin only after all backspin has worn off and the CB has developed full roll. At that point
the CB will have more effective sidespin than is possible with any other hit. For those interested, a math and
physics based proof can be found in TP B.17.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       January, 2016
                                Diagram 4 Ideal tip contact points for maximum spin effect

     Demonstrations of the shots in this article can be viewed in online video NV G.4, and the VEEB-II DVD
includes many more game-situation examples dealing with position play, combination shots, carom shots, kiss
shots, cluster shots, kick and bank shots, and throw shots. As always, you should check out the videos and try
the shots yourself the next time you are at a table. Reading is good, and watching is better, but trying is best.

     I hope you enjoy my series of articles dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB).” If you want
to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV G.1 through NV G.11. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV B.10 – Drag Spin Loss and Sidespin Persistence
                    NV G.1 – Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB) Overview
                    NV G.2 – How to Deal With Pocket Blockers in 8-ball, from Disc I of VEEB
                    NV G.3 – How to Select Key Balls in 8-ball, from Disc I of VEEB
                    NV G.4 – How to Use Cue Ball Drag to Enhance Sidespin in 8-ball, from Disc II of VEEB
                    NV G.5 – How to Use Spin-Induced Throw to Hold the Cue Ball in 8-ball, from Disc II of VEEB
normal video
                    NV G.6 – How to Come Into the Line of Blockers When Playing Safeties, from Disc III of VEEB
                    NV G.7 – Various Straight-In Shot Options in 8-ball, from Disc III of VEEB
                    NV G.8 – How to Deal with an End-Game Ball Tied Up with the 8-ball, from Disc IV of VEEB
                    NV G.9 – 2nd-Ball 8-ball Break, from Disc IV of VEEB
                    NV G.10 – Rack 8 Run-Out Example from Disc V of VEEB
                    NV G.11 – Rack 9 Run-Out Example from Disc V of VEEB

                    TP B.17 – Maximum Drag-Enhanced Sidespin Tip Contact Point
technical proof

PS:
              I am happy to announce that my entire collection of instructional DVDs (23 total to date) is now available
               for streaming via YouTube. For more info, see: dr-dave-billiards.com/stream.html.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         January, 2016
         I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
          with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
          the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the Video Encyclopedias of “Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Pool Practice (VEPP),” and “Eight Ball
(VEEB),” and the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS),” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD
series.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     January, 2016
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veeb_part_iv_throw_hold_shots.pdf
title: VEEB Part Iv Throw Hold Shots
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEEB – Part IV: Throw Hold Shots”                                           ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the fourth article in a series dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB),” a five-disc
instructional-DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett. VEEB teaches all of the
skills, knowledge and strategy one needs to excel at 8-ball. Topics include offensive and defensive strategy,
position play, shot types, safety play, advanced shots, and run-out planning. An outline of the entire VEEB series
along with video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/8-ball.

    This month, we look at how to use throw to help hold and limit cue ball (CB) motion after a shot. Throw is a
change in object ball (OB) direction due to sideways friction force between the CB and OB during contact. As
described and demonstrated in online video NV B.86, when throw is due to cut angle, it is called cut-induced
throw (CIT); and when it is due to sidespin, it is called spin-induced throw (SIT). If you are not very familiar with
throw, you should view the video before continuing.

     Diagram 1 shows how to use sidespin to help limit CB motion after a shot. In Diagram 1a, pure stun is used,
with no sidespin. This shot results in a certain amount of CB drift to the right (down in the diagram). In Diagram
1b, SIT is used to help hold the CB to a shorter travel distance. The OB is assumed to head in the same direction
and speed as with the first shot. SIT allows you to hit the OB on the left side a little (creating a small cut angle to
the right), and still have the OB ball head to the left as shown. Friction between the balls throws the OB to the left
and throws the CB an equal and opposite amount to the right, but the cut angle reduces the net CB speed
resulting in less travel distance than in Diagram 1a. Online analysis TP A.29 shows all of the math and physics
behind the effect. The reduction in CB drift might not be very large (e.g., an inch or less), but sometimes even a
half CB rotation can mean the difference between a win and a loss.

                        Diagram 1 Comparison of cue-ball hold with and without throw

Billiards Digest                                                                                     February, 2016
     As pointed out at the bottom of TP A.29, it is theoretically possible (neglecting swerve) to hold the CB and
create an OB angle at any CB-OB distance. However, in the real world, there is a practical limit to the CB-OB
distances over which this works. The analysis in TP A.29 ignores the effects of swerve. Swerve changes the
effective cut angle of the shot, making it more difficult to hold the CB. And at larger distances, swerve becomes
more of a factor. You might think you can eliminate the effects of swerve by using faster speed, but the problem
is the amount of SIT is less at faster speeds. Also, stun (for maximum throw) is more difficult to control at larger
distances. Also, it is much more difficult to judge squirt and swerve and be accurate with the hit at larger
distances.

    Bob Jewett has a good test to explore the ability to use sidespin to hold the CB at:
www.sfbilliards.com/Misc/throwtest.gif. Give the experiment a try if you’re still not convinced. At small distances
with slow-speed stun, with about 50% english, the effect of throw is irrefutable and dramatic. In fact, with a small
enough cut angle and the right amounts of speed and spin, the CB can actually be made to move in the same
direction as the OB (e.g., to the right, with a cut to the right). An example can be viewed in the first shot of online
video NV B.21.

     Diagram 2 shows a good example where throw-assisted hold is called for. We are shooting stripes and need
to pocket the 10 while holding the CB for a shot at the 14 next to continue the run-out. As demonstrated in online
video NV G.5, even at less than pocket speed, with as little angle to the pocket as possible, we can’t hold the CB
for the 14 using pure stun. However, with about half of maximum right sidespin and stun, at pocket speed, we
can easily hold the CB. As described above, SIT allows us to hit the 10 thicker, resulting in less CB motion.

                       Diagram 2 Example of using SIT to hold the CB for the next shot

     Demonstrations of the shots in this article can be viewed in online video NV G.5, and the VEEB-II DVD
includes many more game-situation examples dealing with position play, combination shots, carom shots, kiss
shots, cluster shots, kick and bank shots, and throw shots. As always, you should check out the videos and try
the shots yourself the next time you’re at a table. Reading is good, and watching is better, but trying is best.

     I hope you enjoy my series of articles dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB).” If you want
to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV G.1 through NV G.11. Enjoy!

Billiards Digest                                                                                     February, 2016
Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV B.21 – Straight shot squirt, swerve, and throw
                    NV B.86 – Cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT), from VEPS IV
                    NV G.1 – Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB) Overview
                    NV G.2 – How to Deal With Pocket Blockers in 8-ball, from Disc I of VEEB
                    NV G.3 – How to Select Key Balls in 8-ball, from Disc I of VEEB
                    NV G.4 – How to Use Cue Ball Drag to Enhance Sidespin in 8-ball, from Disc II of VEEB
                    NV G.5 – How to Use Spin-Induced Throw to Hold the Cue Ball in 8-ball, from Disc II of VEEB
normal video        NV G.6 – How to Come Into the Line of Blockers When Playing Safeties, from Disc III of VEEB
                    NV G.7 – Various Straight-In Shot Options in 8-ball, from Disc III of VEEB
                    NV G.8 – How to Deal with an End-Game Ball Tied Up with the 8-ball, from Disc IV of VEEB
                    NV G.9 – 2nd-Ball 8-ball Break, from Disc IV of VEEB
                    NV G.10 – Rack 8 Run-Out Example from Disc V of VEEB
                    NV G.11 – Rack 9 Run-Out Example from Disc V of VEEB

                    TP A.29 – Using throw to limit cue ball motion
technical proof

PS:
      •        I am happy to announce that my entire collection of instructional DVDs (23 total to date) is now available
               for streaming via YouTube. For more info, see: dr-dave-billiards.com/stream.html.
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
               with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
               the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the Video Encyclopedias of “Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Pool Practice (VEPP),” and “Eight Ball
(VEEB),” and the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS)” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD
series, all available at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         February, 2016
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veeb_part_ix_run_out_examples.pdf
title: VEEB Part Ix Run Out Examples
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
VEEB – Part IX: Run-Out Examples                                                 ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
by David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

    This is the ninth and final article in a series dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB),” a five-
disc instructional-DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett. VEEB teaches all
of the skills, knowledge and strategy one needs to excel at 8-ball. Topics include offensive and defensive
strategy, position play, shot types, safety play, advanced shots, and run-out planning. An outline of the entire
VEEB series along with video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/8-ball.
This month, we look at two run-out examples from Disc V.

     Diagram 1a shows the ball layout after the break for rack 8 of the 20 run-out examples on VEEB-V. Be sure
to look at the ball layout first to see what decisions you would make, before reading on to see what Bob did. This
rack highlights the importance of break-out shots, along with good position play. Stripes is not a good choice
because you would need to break out the 14 with a shot at the 10 later, and this might cause additional problems
with the number of balls that might move and with number of solids that could block pockets. Also, the 13 on the
rail, with access limited by the 5, is a small problem. Solids is a much better choice since there are multiple
options for opening up the 8.

    As shown in Diagram 1b, one option is to free up the 8 with the first shot on the 7. The plan is to hit the 14
clean to open up the 8, using a rolling CB with right sidespin to get the desired angle off the cushion. Even if this
doesn’t work out perfectly, there are several solid “insurance” balls for possible follow-on shot. The diagram
shows how the shot worked out on the DVD. Since the shot on the 6 ended up fairly straight, Bob decided to
draw back into the 8 to get it even further out into the open. On the DVD, Bob kissed the 11 first, but the plan still
worked out to shoot the 3 next. The 3 is a good transition ball to the 5 to finish off the group of solids up table.

     With the layout in Diagram 1c, no problems remain. Bob had originally planned to head farther up table after
the 5 to shoot the 2 in the side next, but because he came up a little short, he decided to shoot the 4 next, which
was fairly straight in with a natural angle to get shape on the 1 or 2 next. The diagram shows the rest of the run-
out which was fairly straight-forward. On the 1-ball shot, Bob could have drawn off the side cushion or rolled
forward off the end cushion to get a shot at the 8, but he decided to go forward off 2 rails instead to come more
into the line of the 8-ball shot. That choice offered a larger margin for error with speed to get a decent look at the
8.

Billiards Digest                                                                                              July, 2016
                   a.) post-break ball layout

                   b.) beginning sequence

Billiards Digest                                July, 2016
                                                  c.) end sequence

                                     Diagram 1 Rack “8” run-out example

     Diagram 2a shows the ball layout after the break for rack 9 from VEEB-V. Again, think through the layout first
before continuing. This rack is a good example of planning an early break-out and choosing the best key ball. To
begin, there is no easy opening shot at a stripe except the 15-9 combo. That’s actually not a terrible shot, but the
10 and 14 are in tough places, so solids is a better choice. The only problem for solids is the 2-14 cluster;
however, my plan was to break that out early in the rack. As shown in Diagram 2b, I decided to start with the 5
and get an angle on the 4 to allow a draw shot into the cluster. At the angle on the 4-ball shown, the margin for
error for getting the break-out is quite large with the 2 and 14 being close to the rail, assuming the side pocket is
avoided. The diagram shows how the shot worked out on the DVD. The break-out was a little risky, but even if I
didn’t hit the 14 so square, or even if I hit the 2 first, I was confident I would have a shot at the 2 or 6 next. I
ended up with a shot at the 6 as shown. After the 6, I could have shot the 3 next to get position on the short side
of the 2 and 7 to shoot those next. However, I didn’t want to use the 1 as the key ball to get on the 8 which only
has 1 reasonable pocket. Instead, I decided to use the 1 to get position on the 2 for a shot at the 7 next, using the
3 as a key ball for the 8. As shown in Diagram 2c, the 15 offers a good target and stopper to get a good angle on
the 7 to draw out for the 3 next. I decided to go 3 rails off the 3 for natural shape on the 8.

Billiards Digest                                                                                            July, 2016
                   a.) post-break ball layout

                   b.) beginning sequence

Billiards Digest                                July, 2016
                                                     c.) end sequence

                                         Diagram 2 Rack “9” run-out example

    Online videos NV G.10 and NV G.11 show the complete run-outs described and illustrated above. Check
them out the next time you’re online. The VEEB-V DVD includes many more run-out examples along with game-
situation examples dealing with the break, jump shots, end-game situations, rule calls, and foul detection and
avoidance. As always, you should check out the videos and try the run-outs yourself the next time you’re at a
table. Reading is good, and watching is better, but trying is best.

    I hope you have enjoyed my series of articles dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB).” If
you want to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV G.1 through NV G.11.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV G.1 – Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB) Overview
                   NV G.2 – How to Deal With Pocket Blockers in 8-ball, from Disc I of VEEB
                   NV G.3 – How to Select Key Balls in 8-ball, from Disc I of VEEB
                   NV G.4 – How to Use Cue Ball Drag to Enhance Sidespin in 8-ball, from Disc II of VEEB
                   NV G.5 – How to Use Spin-Induced Throw to Hold the Cue Ball in 8-ball, from Disc II of VEEB
                   NV G.6 – How to Come Into the Line of Blockers When Playing Safeties, from Disc III of VEEB
normal video       NV G.7 – Various Straight-In Shot Options in 8-ball, from Disc III of VEEB
                   NV G.8 – How to Deal with an End-Game Ball Tied Up with the 8-ball, from Disc IV of VEEB
                   NV G.9 – 2nd-Ball 8-ball Break, from Disc IV of VEEB
                   NV G.10 – Rack 8 Run-Out Example from Disc V of VEEB
                   NV G.11 – Rack 9 Run-Out Example from Disc V of VEEB

Billiards Digest                                                                                           July, 2016
PS:
      •   I am happy to announce that my entire collection of instructional DVDs (23 total to date) is now available
          for streaming via YouTube. For more info, see: dr-dave-billiards.com/stream.html.
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
          with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
          the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the Video Encyclopedias of “Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Pool Practice (VEPP),” and “Eight Ball
(VEEB),” and the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS)” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD
series, all available at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                            July, 2016
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veeb_part_v_coming_into_the_line_of_blockers.pdf
title: VEEB Part V Coming Into The Line Of Blockers
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEEB – Part V: Coming Into the Line of Blockers”                          ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the fifth article in a series dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB),” a five-disc
instructional-DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett. VEEB teaches all of the
skills, knowledge and strategy one needs to excel at 8-ball. Topics include offensive and defensive strategy,
position play, shot types, safety play, advanced shots, and run-out planning. An outline of the entire VEEB series
along with video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/8-ball.

    This month, we look at how to come into the line of blockers when playing safeties to increase the margin for
error in cue ball (CB) speed control. Diagram 1 shows an 8-ball situation, shooting solids, where a safety is a
good option, assuming we play it smartly. We could be aggressive and attempt to bank the 3 cross corner.
However, if we are not confident to make this shot and get position on the 1, a better approach is to play safe by
hiding the CB behind the 1 and 8. Here, the “safety zone” hiding area is quite large; and, fortunately, the natural
3-rail path off the 3 ball heads straight into the long dimension of the area. This direction is along the “line of
blockers” between the 11 ball and the center of the blocking 1-8 cluster. In cases like this, the margin for error
with speed is huge. We can come up well short (at CB positions C-2, C-3 or C-4) or go clear to the blocking balls
(at C-1) and still snooker our opponent. Also, if we can leave the 3 in the path to the 11, as shown, we will take
away a jump shot possibility in case we don’t leave the CB very close to the blockers.

                          Diagram 1 Coming-into-the-line-of-blockers – Example 1

    Diagram 2 shows another 8-ball situation, again shooting solids, where a smart safety is a good option.
Here, we have a choice in the direction we can head to hide the CB. As shown by the solid lines in the diagram,
we could go off the left side of the 1 and head across the “safety zone” hiding area. In this case, because the
safety zone is so wide, a fairly large range of speeds will hide the CB. Ideally, we land close to the target at CB
position C-1. However, if we come up a bit short (at CB position C-2) or go a bit long (at CB position C-3), we will

Billiards Digest                                                                                     March, 2016
leave our opponent a look at, and maybe even a shot at, the 11. A much better option is to go off the right side of
the 1 and come more into the line of the safety zone along the line of blockers. This approach is shown with the
dashed lines in the diagram. This option gives us a much larger margin for error with speed. If we end up
anywhere between CB positions C-4 and C-5, along the dotted line through the safety zone, we will snooker our
opponent. The error margin with speed for this shot is much larger than with the first option. Making smart
choices like this with safety play is one thing that separates the great players from the good ones. And the bad
ones don’t even think of the safety, and they attempt low-percentage offensive shots instead.

                          Diagram 2 Coming-into-the-line-of-blockers – Example 2

     Demonstrations of all of the shots in this article can be viewed in online video NV G.6, and the VEEB-III DVD
includes many more game-situation examples dealing with defensive safeties, offensive safeties, safety replies,
and ball-in-hand options. As always, you should check out the videos and try the shots yourself the next time
you’re at a table. Reading is good, and watching is better, but trying is best.

     I hope you enjoy my series of articles dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB).” If you want
to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV G.1 through NV G.11. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                                    March, 2016
                    NV G.1 – Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB) Overview
                    NV G.2 – How to Deal With Pocket Blockers in 8-ball, from Disc I of VEEB
                    NV G.3 – How to Select Key Balls in 8-ball, from Disc I of VEEB
                    NV G.4 – How to Use Cue Ball Drag to Enhance Sidespin in 8-ball, from Disc II of VEEB
                    NV G.5 – How to Use Spin-Induced Throw to Hold the Cue Ball in 8-ball, from Disc II of VEEB
                    NV G.6 – How to Come Into the Line of Blockers When Playing Safeties, from Disc III of VEEB
normal video        NV G.7 – Various Straight-In Shot Options in 8-ball, from Disc III of VEEB
                    NV G.8 – How to Deal with an End-Game Ball Tied Up with the 8-ball, from Disc IV of VEEB
                    NV G.9 – 2nd-Ball 8-ball Break, from Disc IV of VEEB
                    NV G.10 – Rack 8 Run-Out Example from Disc V of VEEB
                    NV G.11 – Rack 9 Run-Out Example from Disc V of VEEB

PS:
      •        I am happy to announce that my entire collection of instructional DVDs (23 total to date) is now available
               for streaming via YouTube. For more info, see: dr-dave-billiards.com/stream.html.
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
               with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
               the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the Video Encyclopedias of “Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Pool Practice (VEPP),” and “Eight Ball
(VEEB),” and the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS)” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD
series, all available at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                           March, 2016
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veeb_part_vi_straight_in_shot_options.pdf
title: VEEB Part Vi Straight In Shot Options
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEEB – Part VI: Straight-In Shot Options”                                   ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the sixth article in a series dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB),” a five-disc
instructional-DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett. VEEB teaches all of the
skills, knowledge and strategy one needs to excel at 8-ball. Topics include offensive and defensive strategy,
position play, shot types, safety play, advanced shots, and run-out planning. An outline of the entire VEEB series
along with video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/8-ball.

     This month, we look at some offensive and defensive options you have when faced with straight-in shots.
Diagram 1 shows an 8-ball situation, shooting stripes, where you are facing a straight-in shot on the 14 and a
small position window for the 12. And to get good position on the 8, you would need to end up fairly straight on
the 12 to be able to draw straight back to the long side of the 8. One option here (not shown in the diagram) is to
pocket the 14 and roll forward with the cue ball (CB) to leave a long shot on the 12, but it would be very difficult to
reliably execute a draw shot at this distance and with the CB so close to the end rail. Another, more aggressive
option is to draw back with sidespin to get the CB closer to the 14 (see the blue CB path in the diagram). This is a
tough shot to control with CB accuracy. If you come up a little short, you would need to go rail first to pocket the
12 and get position on the 8. And if you go too far with the wrong angle, it is possible to scratch in the side. In
other words, this difficult and risky option is probably not a good choice.

                                  Diagram 1 Straight-in-shot offensive options

    Another offensive option is to cheat the pocket slightly and stun forward with fast speed, as shown with the
red CB path in Diagram 1. This doesn’t involve a risk of scratching, as with the previous shot, but it can be risky
cheating the pocket at fast speed because the ball can easily rattle out, especially on a table with tight pockets.
Also, as with the previous shot, if you leave an angle on the 12, you might not be able to draw straight back and
avoid the 6; although, you might be able to use soft draw and sidespin to attempt to hug the rail and leave a

Billiards Digest                                                                                         April, 2016
longer shot on the 8. If there is too much angle on the 12 to avoid the 6, another option is to follow forward and
go off 2 or 3 rails to the short side of the 8. However, none of these options are ideal.

    In situations like this, where the offensive options are difficult, sometimes a safety is a better play. Diagram 2
shows two defensive options. One option is to bump the 14 close to the pocket and leave your opponent with the
CB at position C-1 facing a long, tough shot on the 3 (see the blue CB path). One risk with this shot is if you don’t
block the pocket with the 14, your opponent has fairly natural shape on the short side of the 6 if he or she pockets
the 3, so you could lose this game with a poor hit. Therefore, this safety isn’t as effective as we might like.

    The best option here is to feather the 14 and leave the CB in position C-2 behind the 14 (see the red CB path
in Diagram 2). This shot is fairly easy to execute and will leave you a heavy favorite to win the game, with the
opponent not having a good chance to even hit the 3 or 6. That’s what safety play is all about.

                                 Diagram 2 Straight-in-shot defensive options

     Demonstrations of all of the shots in this article can be viewed in online video NV G.7, and the VEEB-III DVD
includes many more game-situation examples dealing with defensive safeties, offensive safeties, safety replies,
and ball-in-hand options. As always, you should check out the videos and try the shots yourself the next time
you’re at a table. Reading is good, and watching is better, but trying is best.

     I hope you enjoy my series of articles dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB).” If you want
to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV G.1 through NV G.11. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                                        April, 2016
                    NV G.1 – Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB) Overview
                    NV G.2 – How to Deal With Pocket Blockers in 8-ball, from Disc I of VEEB
                    NV G.3 – How to Select Key Balls in 8-ball, from Disc I of VEEB
                    NV G.4 – How to Use Cue Ball Drag to Enhance Sidespin in 8-ball, from Disc II of VEEB
                    NV G.5 – How to Use Spin-Induced Throw to Hold the Cue Ball in 8-ball, from Disc II of VEEB
                    NV G.6 – How to Come Into the Line of Blockers When Playing Safeties, from Disc III of VEEB
normal video        NV G.7 – Various Straight-In Shot Options in 8-ball, from Disc III of VEEB
                    NV G.8 – How to Deal with an End-Game Ball Tied Up with the 8-ball, from Disc IV of VEEB
                    NV G.9 – 2nd-Ball 8-ball Break, from Disc IV of VEEB
                    NV G.10 – Rack 8 Run-Out Example from Disc V of VEEB
                    NV G.11 – Rack 9 Run-Out Example from Disc V of VEEB

PS:
      •        I am happy to announce that my entire collection of instructional DVDs (23 total to date) is now available
               for streaming via YouTube. For more info, see: dr-dave-billiards.com/stream.html.
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
               with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
               the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the Video Encyclopedias of “Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Pool Practice (VEPP),” and “Eight Ball
(VEEB),” and the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS)” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD
series, all available at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                             April, 2016
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veeb_part_vii_end_game_situations.pdf
title: VEEB Part Vii End Game Situations
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEEB – Part VII: End-Game Situations”                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the seventh article in a series dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB),” a five-disc
instructional-DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett. VEEB teaches all of the
skills, knowledge and strategy one needs to excel at 8-ball. Topics include offensive and defensive strategy,
position play, shot types, safety play, advanced shots, and run-out planning. An outline of the entire VEEB series
along with video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/8-ball.

    This month, we look at strategy for end-game situations where you have a ball tied up with the 8-ball. “Shot
A” in Diagram 1 shows an example where you have ball in hand, shooting solids. What would you do in this
situation? Think about it first before reading on. You don’t have a reasonable shot here, so a good choice is to
play safe. Sometimes, if your opponent has no reasonable shot or safety on the 8, the best option might be to tie
up your last ball with the 8. In fact, that could be why you have ball-in-hand in this situation, since your opponent
may not have had a reasonable chance to hit the 8 on the previous shot. Here, you could just tap the 5 into the 8
and leave the balls is a similar position but closer together, but this really doesn’t accomplish anything.
Alternatively, you could try to hit the 5 into the 8 a little harder to create separation so you would have a shot at
the 5 if your opponent goes for a hit on the 8. However, in this situation, your opponent might just take an
intentional foul and send the 5 back up against the 8. Online video NV G.8 shows an example sequence of shots
demonstrating how this situation might pan out. You wouldn’t want to keep doing this because the 8 would
eventually end up in front of the pocket where your opponent might have a fairly easy kick shot for the win.

                          Diagram 1 End-game situations with ball tied up with the 8

    Now, if the balls were at an angle and touching as shown in “Shot B,” you could separate them and leave no
easy way for your opponent to tie them up again. The best plan is to separate the 5 and 8 and freeze the CB to
the 5 at an angle. This is fairly easy to do since the 5 won’t move very much after it hits the 8. A touch of right

Billiards Digest                                                                                            May, 2016
sidespin will help the CB stay closer to the cushion and snuggle under the 5. In the final ball positions, you have
separation, your opponent has no reasonable shot to get a hit on the 8, and there is no reasonable way for your
opponent to tie the 5 up with the 8 again (without giving you a shot). You will likely get ball in hand again and win
the game.

     Diagram 2 shows another 8-ball end-game situation where the 8 ball is tied up with an opponent ball. Here,
shooting solids, it would be very difficult to break out the 8-13 cluster from the straight position you have on the 5.
And you wouldn’t want to pocket the 5 with no shot at the 8. A good approach in situations like this is to play safe
and position your last ball closer to the cluster where you can later get an easier break-out shot. The diagram
shows a good way to play the shot. You’ve left your opponent with no look at the 13, and any attempt by your
opponent to hit the 13 will likely leave us with a shot or a chance at another safety. And if you get ball in hand, a
natural-angle break-out would be fairly easy (assuming your opponent isn’t smart enough to move or pocket the
5, taking an intentional foul), and you would likely get a decent look at the 8.

                              Diagram 2 End-game break-out-plan safety example

     Demonstrations of the shots in this article can be viewed in online video NV G.8, and the VEEB-IV DVD
includes many more game-situation examples dealing with jump shots, break shots, end-game situations, rule
calls, and foul detection and avoidance. As always, you should check out the videos and try the shots yourself
the next time you’re at a table. Reading is good, and watching is better, but trying is best.

    I hope you are enjoying my series of articles dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB).” If
you want to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV G.1 through NV G.11.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                                              May, 2016
                    NV G.1 – Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB) Overview
                    NV G.2 – How to Deal With Pocket Blockers in 8-ball, from Disc I of VEEB
                    NV G.3 – How to Select Key Balls in 8-ball, from Disc I of VEEB
                    NV G.4 – How to Use Cue Ball Drag to Enhance Sidespin in 8-ball, from Disc II of VEEB
                    NV G.5 – How to Use Spin-Induced Throw to Hold the Cue Ball in 8-ball, from Disc II of VEEB
                    NV G.6 – How to Come Into the Line of Blockers When Playing Safeties, from Disc III of VEEB
normal video        NV G.7 – Various Straight-In Shot Options in 8-ball, from Disc III of VEEB
                    NV G.8 – How to Deal with an End-Game Ball Tied Up with the 8-ball, from Disc IV of VEEB
                    NV G.9 – 2nd-Ball 8-ball Break, from Disc IV of VEEB
                    NV G.10 – Rack 8 Run-Out Example from Disc V of VEEB
                    NV G.11 – Rack 9 Run-Out Example from Disc V of VEEB

PS:
      •        I am happy to announce that my entire collection of instructional DVDs (23 total to date) is now available
               for streaming via YouTube. For more info, see: dr-dave-billiards.com/stream.html.
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
               with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
               the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the Video Encyclopedias of “Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Pool Practice (VEPP),” and “Eight Ball
(VEEB),” and the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS)” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD
series, all available at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                                 May, 2016
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veeb_part_viii_the_break.pdf
title: VEEB Part Viii The Break
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEEB – Part VIII: The Break”                                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all of
my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the eighth article in a series dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB),” a five-disc
instructional-DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett. VEEB teaches all of the
skills, knowledge and strategy one needs to excel at 8-ball. Topics include offensive and defensive strategy,
position play, shot types, safety play, advanced shots, and run-out planning. An outline of the entire VEEB series
along with video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/8-ball. This month, we
look at the most important shot in 8-ball … the break. If a good player makes a ball, gets a good spread, and has
an opening shot after the break, that person is a huge favorite to win the game.

    The most important element for getting a good break is making sure the balls are racked properly, with as
many of the balls touching each other as possible. If there are gaps between the balls, even a good hit can yield
poor results. Remember, always rack carefully and if you are playing under rules where your opponent or a
referee racks for you, be sure to check the rack for gaps before breaking. There is nothing wrong with asking for
a re-rack if the rack isn’t tight.

     The next most important thing to remember about the break is to use only as much power as you can control.
If you try to hit the break too hard, you won’t have accuracy or consistency. It is much better to use a little less
power and get an accurate hit. A square hit delivers all of the cue ball (CB) energy to the rack and results in a
good spread. Also, the CB won’t head toward rails and pockets with a possible risk of scratching, unless it gets
bumped by another ball. Your goal should be to try to “squat the rock” near the center of the table to have the
most options after the break. To do this with power, the CB must have a touch of topspin. Due to the effective
mass of the rack, with a square hit, the CB will bounce back from the rack. If the CB didn’t have topspin, it would
continue back up table. With a touch of topspin, the bounce-back motion is slowed, allowing the CB to come to
rest near the center of the table.

     Where you decide to break from is a personal choice, but there are several obvious options. As a general
rule, always break from the head string so the CB is as close as possible to the rack. The most standard position
to break from is slightly off center, as shown in Diagram 1. With a square hit, the front ball generally heads up
table, sometimes toward the corner pocket. As also shown in Diagram 1, the 2nd-row balls usually head toward
the side pockets. One reason to position the CB slightly off center is to create slightly different angles to the side
pockets giving the best chance for at least one of the 2nd-row balls to go. Also, the corner balls tend to go four
rails around the table toward the corner pockets. With a good rack and a good hit, if nothing else gets in the way,
these balls have a chance to go.

     Sometimes, depending on conditions, how the racked balls are sitting, and how a table is playing, you might
get better results in one CB position vs. another, so it is good to try out different spots and angles. Sometimes
just moving to the other side of the table can make a difference.

    Sometimes, even with a really good hit, you won’t make a ball on the break. Unfortunately, the worst possible
outcome of an 8-ball break is to spread the balls and leave the CB in the center with a wide open table for your
opponent with no problems to solve. Luckily this will happen to your opponent at times also. The randomness of
the break is one of the things that makes 8-ball so interesting.

Billiards Digest                                                                                            June, 2016
                                                            st
                                              Diagram 1 1 -ball break

     As shown in Diagram 2, another common break shot is where you break from the side rail and target the ball
in the 2nd row instead of the front ball. If you hit the ball as squarely as possible, the balls usually spread well.
Also, the 8-ball will generally move out of the rack area. If playing under rules where pocketing the 8 on the break
counts as a win (e.g., in the APA league system), the 2nd-ball break is a good option since the 8-ball motion gives
you the best chance to pocket the 8 on the break. Even though the odds are low to pocket the 8, the game-
victory payoff justifies the approach. The 8-ball will generally move toward the opposite side pocket, but motion in
other directions is also common, depending on exactly how the racked balls are sitting.

     If you get a fairly square hit on the 2nd ball and use a bit of draw and/or outside spin, the CB will also tend to
bounce back through the rack area. This is a good approach since it can help a sluggish 8-ball move more and
help clear any clusters that might remain in the rack area. Another advantage of a 2nd ball break is that if the
balls rack and sit well, and if the hit is good, the opposite corner ball has a very good chance to go in the corner
pocket.

     One disadvantage of going across the table with the CB is that it can tie up with balls that sometimes remain
in the rack area. Also, sometimes the CB can carom off a ball while going across the table, which could lead to a
scratch. Some people prefer using softer speed and a little more draw and/or outside spin to send the CB toward
the center of the table instead where there will usually be less traffic and more options.

     Another potential disadvantage of the 2nd-ball break is the likelihood of a scratch if you are not very accurate
and consistent with the hit. If you hit the front ball a bit before the 2nd ball, a scratch in the corner is very likely.
You can also scratch if you don’t hit the 2nd-row ball squarely enough. Scratching on the break, especially if you
pocket balls and get a good spread, is a terrible thing. A good player will be very likely to run out with ball in hand
after the break, especially if there are no real problems to solve. And even a not-so-good player has a huge edge
against a player of similar skill with ball in hand after the break because they get to choose the set of balls that
offers the best chance of winning. If you are not accurate enough to consistently hit the 2nd ball squarely and
avoid the front ball, you probably shouldn’t use the 2nd ball break. Scratching on the break is too big of a penalty
to risk.

Billiards Digest                                                                                               June, 2016
                                                                nd
                                                  Diagram 2 2 -ball break

    Online video NV G.9 demonstrates all of the opportunities and issues described in this article with numerous
examples. And if you want more technique and strategy advice dealing with the break, see the “break” FAQ page
at billiards.colostate.edu. Also, the VEEB-IV DVD includes many more break examples along with game-
situation examples dealing with jump shots, end-game situations, rule calls, and foul detection and avoidance. As
always, you should check out the videos and try the shots yourself the next time you’re at a table. Reading is
good, and watching is better, but trying is best.

    I hope you are enjoying my series of articles dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB).” If
you want to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV G.1 through NV G.11.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV G.1 – Video Encyclopedia of Eight Ball (VEEB) Overview
                    NV G.2 – How to Deal With Pocket Blockers in 8-ball, from Disc I of VEEB
                    NV G.3 – How to Select Key Balls in 8-ball, from Disc I of VEEB
                    NV G.4 – How to Use Cue Ball Drag to Enhance Sidespin in 8-ball, from Disc II of VEEB
                    NV G.5 – How to Use Spin-Induced Throw to Hold the Cue Ball in 8-ball, from Disc II of VEEB
                    NV G.6 – How to Come Into the Line of Blockers When Playing Safeties, from Disc III of VEEB
normal video        NV G.7 – Various Straight-In Shot Options in 8-ball, from Disc III of VEEB
                    NV G.8 – How to Deal with an End-Game Ball Tied Up with the 8-ball, from Disc IV of VEEB
                    NV G.9 – 2nd-Ball 8-ball Break, from Disc IV of VEEB
                    NV G.10 – Rack 8 Run-Out Example from Disc V of VEEB
                    NV G.11 – Rack 9 Run-Out Example from Disc V of VEEB

PS:
      •        I am happy to announce that my entire collection of instructional DVDs (23 total to date) is now available
               for streaming via YouTube. For more info, see: dr-dave-billiards.com/stream.html.

Billiards Digest                                                                                                June, 2016
     •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
          with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to
          the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is author of “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards” book and DVD, and co-author
of the Video Encyclopedias of “Pool Shots (VEPS),” “Pool Practice (VEPP),” and “Eight Ball
(VEEB),” and the “How to Aim Pool Shots (HAPS)” and “Billiard University (BU)” instructional DVD
series, all available at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                           June, 2016
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vent_part_i_corey_s_9_ball_soft_break.pdf
title: VENT Part I Corey S 9 Ball Soft Break
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VENT – Part I: Corey’s 9-ball Soft Break”                                    ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu.
The reference numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the first article in a series dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT),”
a five-disc instructional-DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett. VENT
teaches all of the skills, knowledge and strategy one needs to excel at 9-ball and 10-ball. Topics include
break shot strategy and effects, game planning, position play and english, safety play, and advanced
principles, shots, and strategies. An outline of the entire VENT series along with video excerpts from each
DVD can be viewed online at: DrDaveBilliards.com/vent.

     The topic for this month, soft breaking and pattern racking, is from the first Disc of VENT (VENT-I). These
techniques have been used by Corey Deuel and others to gain a big advantage in some tournaments.
Pattern racking refers to purposefully racking the balls in strategic positions to take advantage of where those
balls typically head. For more information and video demonstrations related to pattern racking and its effects,
see the “pattern racking” resource page under “break” in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu. I should
be clear that pattern racking is illegal and unethical unless tournament rules specifically allow it. The World
Pool-Billiard Association (WPA) World Standardized Rules (WSR) specifically prohibits pattern racking.

      Diagram 1 shows a soft-break pattern-racking trick that is particularly effective. I first saw it used by
Corey Deuel in the 2016 Cue Sports International (CSI) 9-ball Challenge. Videos and images demonstrating
this break and its sinister effectiveness can be found on the pattern-racking resource page. The 2 and 3 are
placed behind the 1. It doesn’t really matter where the other balls are placed. Using a soft, square hit with
slight draw from the 3-ball side of the table, the CB bounces straight back a little and the 1 positions itself right
in front of the side pocket with a good follow-on shot on the 2 to get easy shape on the 3. The 3 moves very
little with a soft break from the side and usually sits nearly perfect for an easy 3-9 combination for the early
win.

                            Diagram 1 Corey’s soft-break pattern-racking cheat

    As shown on the VENT-I DVD, with a good rack, it is very easy to pocket the wing ball (the 5 in Diagram
1) with a break from the side rail at any speed, even very soft. During VENT filming with Bob, I don’t recall
missing the wing ball once during all of our side breaks, except when we purposely added gaps in different

Billiards Digest                                                                                        October, 2017
parts of the rack to demonstrate their effects. If using a racking template or if a table is trained, it is very easy
to get a good rack, and it is rare to not pocket the wing ball with a side break. Because of this, some
tournaments prohibit racking templates, limit where you can place the CB in the kitchen for the break (e.g.,
break from the “box”), change the position the rack must be placed relative to the foot spot (e.g., with the 9
“on the spot”), and/or use a 3-point rule where three or more balls must either be pocketed or be driven to the
head string. The 3-point rule effectively eliminates soft breaking as a viable option. But the 3-point rule is not
a standard rule (i.e., it is not required in the WPA World Standardized Rules), so it applies only when it is
added as an extra tournament rule. VENT-I discusses and demonstrates strategies to defeat all of the
measures listed above used to make the 9-ball break tougher.

    Diagram 2 shows the post-break ball layout after one of Corey’s breaks in the 2016 CSI 9-ball Challenge.
As described above, he has an easy shot at the 1 with an easy follow-on shot at the 2 to get easy shape for
the easy 3-9 combo. During this tournament, Corey was breaking with the CB away from the side rail some
(by almost a diamond) and was using left sidespin; but on VENT, Bob and I broke more from the side with no
sidespin and still got good results. The left sidespin can transfer a little right spin to the 1 that can help
release the 3 from the rack if necessary. It can also help get the 1 closer to the side if necessary. However,
Bob and I found that with the right speed, sidespin (which is more difficult to control) was not required (on my
table, anyway).

                   Diagram 2 Corey Deuel post-break layout in the 2016 CSI 9-ball Challenge

    The use of a soft break with pattern racking just makes a mockery of the game. But you are not allowed
to position the 2 and 3 behind the 1 on purpose and do so repeatedly because pattern racking is illegal. Now,
Billiards Digest                                                                                        October, 2017
you might be saying: “You won’t be able to execute that soft break well every time.” That might be true, but
Bob and I were able to do it fairly consistently after some practice. On VENT-I, we demonstrate many
successful attempts (with circus music playing in the background) to show that it is not as difficult as you
might think. You can view these breaks in online video NV I.2. Now, one can still use the soft break, even
without pattern racking, if the 3-point rule is not being used. Even if a different ball is in the 3-ball position, the
game can still be shortened with an easy combo on the 9 once you clear the lower-numbered balls.

    Again, it is illegal and unethical to use pattern racking, even if your opponent and/or referee are not
noticing what you are doing. Hopefully, this article, my resource page, the YouTube videos, and VENT will
help make people more aware of this sort of thing so unethical players cannot use the pattern-racking trick on
unsuspecting opponents.

    I hope you enjoy my series of articles dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball
(VENT).” If you want to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV I.1 through
NV I.11. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV I.1 – Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT) Instructional DVD Trailer
                    NV I.2 – 9-ball Side Soft Break, and Corey Deuel Pattern Racking, an excerpt from VENT-I
                    NV I.3 – How to Train a Pool Table for Accurate and Consistent Ball Racking, an excerpt from
                         VENT-I
                    NV I.4 – How to be Creative and Consider Various Options in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt
                         from VENT-II
                    NV I.5 – Defensive Strategy in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-II
normal video
                    NV I.6 – Common Two-Rail Position Plays in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-III
                    NV I.7 – Common End-Game Patterns in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-III
                    NV I.8 – 9-ball/10-ball Object Ball Hide Safety Examples, an excerpt from VENT-IV
                    NV I.9 – 9-ball/10-ball Ball-In-Hand Shot Option Examples, an excerpt from VENT-IV
                    NV I.10 – 9-ball/10-ball Rail Cut Shot Principles and Examples, an excerpt from VENT-V
                    NV I.11 – 9-ball/10-ball Advanced Herd and Cushion-Compression Shots, an excerpt from
                         VENT-V

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor and author of the book: The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards and the instructional DVD series: Video Encyclopedias of Pool Shots (VEPS), Pool
Practice (VEPP), Eight Ball (VEEB), and Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT), How to Aim Pool Shots
(HAPS) and Billiard University (BU), all available at: DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          October, 2017
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vent_part_ii_how_to_train_your_table.pdf
title: VENT Part Ii How To Train Your Table
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VENT – Part II: How to Train Your Table”                                    ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu.
The reference numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the second article in a series dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball
(VENT),” a five-disc instructional-DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett.
VENT teaches all of the skills, knowledge and strategy one needs to excel at 9-ball and 10-ball. Topics
include break shot strategy and effects, game planning, position play and english, safety play, and advanced
principles, shots, and strategies. An outline of the entire VENT series along with video excerpts from each
DVD can be viewed online at: DrDaveBilliards.com/vent.

     The topic for this month is how to train your table. In VENT-I, Bob and I describe and demonstrate
various ways to achieve a good rack, including how to use a traditional racking triangle or racking template
effectively. A good summary of some of this advice can be found on the “racking” resource page under
“break” in the FAQ section at billiards.colostate.edu. An alternative to using a racking triangle or template is
to “train” the table, where you firmly tap down on the balls in their desired racking positions, ideally when a
new cloth is installed, so the balls will naturally settle against each other without the need for any racking aid.
The complete table-training procedure is demonstrated in online video NV I.3 and is summarize below.

1. Position the 1-ball Carefully
     The first step to train a table is to firmly tap down on the 1 ball in the center of the foot spot. Be very
careful to make sure the 1 is centered on the spot. Tapping down on a ball with another makes a mark and
semi-permanent indentation in the cloth that allows the ball to accurately settle in the desired position. Don’t
be afraid to tap down hard on the ball. It is practically impossible to damage the slate, and you want the
training indentations to be well defined and long lasting. If you watch the video, you will see (and hear) how
firmly Bob and I tap down on the balls. The amount of force we use might seem alarming to you, especially if
it were used on your own personal table, but I had no concern whatsoever tapping down forcefully on my
home table.

2. Position the Racking Triangle Carefully
     Now place the racking triangle and all of the other balls around the 1 in its set position. In the video, we
used an aluminum Delta-13 rack which can help provide higher-precision positioning of the balls. Make sure
the rack is aligned properly, and do your best to get all of the balls touching. As we demonstrate in the video,
you can use a laser level available at any hardware store to help align the rack centerline. As shown in
Diagram 1, you can also use an angle square to measure and adjust each corner position of the rack to
ensure proper alignment. You can use a fabric pencil to mark the back of the triangle to make it easy to place
it repeatedly with the proper alignment.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    November, 2017
                                         Diagram 1 Aligning the rack

3. Firmly Tap Each Ball Into Place
     Now, while holding the balls firmly in place, lightly tap down on each. Then firm up the ball placements by
tapping down with more force, one row at a time, as shown in Diagram 2. It can help to gradually increase
the force of the tapping as you continually ensure each ball is touching and slightly pushing against its
neighbors. Do this for a full 15-ball rack so the training can be used for all games. If any ball fails to touch all
of its neighbors, you might need to tap it down firmly again, being careful to make sure it is pushing against its
neighbors while tapping. When done properly, all of the other balls in the rack should move slightly during the
tapping.

                                     Diagram 2 Tapping balls into place

Billiards Digest                                                                                     November, 2017
4. Test the Training
    When finished, you can test the training by lightly rotating each of the outer balls away from the rack
center to see how tightly it sits up against its neighbors. If any feel a little loose, re-tap them down again as
before. It is good practice to also do the same tightness check with 10-ball and 9-ball racks. This will help
ensure the table is trained well for all games. Again, if necessary, re-tap any loose balls up against their
neighbors in each rack configuration.

5. Get a Perfect Rack Every Time
    Now the table is properly trained and, as shown in Diagram 3, the cloth has clear marks and slight
indentations that will help ensure consistent racking. It is very easy to rack the balls reliably on a trained
table, without needing a racking triangle or template. Just roll the balls into place, and they will naturally settle
against their neighbors, assuming the balls are not too old and worn, in which case it might be very difficult to
get a tight rack. It takes time to train the table, but it is time well spent. The training will tend to lose its
effectiveness over time, but balls that get loose can easily be tapped down again to re-train when necessary.
Again, the entire procedure is demonstrated in detail in online video NV I.3.

                       Diagram 3 Indentations and marks on the cloth after training

    I hope you enjoy my series of articles dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball
(VENT).” If you want to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV I.1 through
NV I.11. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                                      November, 2017
                    NV I.1 – Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT) Instructional DVD Trailer
                    NV I.2 – 9-ball Side Soft Break, and Corey Deuel Pattern Racking, an excerpt from VENT-I
                    NV I.3 – How to Train a Pool Table for Accurate and Consistent Ball Racking, an excerpt from
                         VENT-I
                    NV I.4 – How to be Creative and Consider Various Options in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt
                         from VENT-II
                    NV I.5 – Defensive Strategy in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-II
normal video
                    NV I.6 – Common Two-Rail Position Plays in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-III
                    NV I.7 – Common End-Game Patterns in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-III
                    NV I.8 – 9-ball/10-ball Object Ball Hide Safety Examples, an excerpt from VENT-IV
                    NV I.9 – 9-ball/10-ball Ball-In-Hand Shot Option Examples, an excerpt from VENT-IV
                    NV I.10 – 9-ball/10-ball Rail Cut Shot Principles and Examples, an excerpt from VENT-V
                    NV I.11 – 9-ball/10-ball Advanced Herd and Cushion-Compression Shots, an excerpt from
                         VENT-V

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor and author of the book: The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards and the instructional DVD series: Video Encyclopedias of Pool Shots (VEPS), Pool
Practice (VEPP), Eight Ball (VEEB), and Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT), How to Aim Pool Shots
(HAPS) and Billiard University (BU), all available at: DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     November, 2017
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vent_part_iii_creative_shot_options.pdf
title: VENT Part Iii Creative Shot Options
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VENT – Part III: Creative Shot Options”                                    ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu.
The reference numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the third article in a series dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT),”
a five-disc instructional-DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett. VENT
teaches all of the skills, knowledge and strategy one needs to excel at 9-ball and 10-ball. Topics include
break shot strategy and effects, game planning, position play and english, safety play, and advanced
principles, shots, and strategies. An outline of the entire VENT series along with video excerpts from each
DVD can be viewed online at: DrDaveBilliards.com/vent.

     The topic for this month is creative shot-option examples, two of which are demonstrated in online video
NV I.4. Diagram 1 shows the layout for the first shot sequence. The goal is to pocket the 1 and hold the cue
ball (CB) in position C1 for the 2, to get easy shape on the 3 in the side. However, as demonstrated in the
video, the CB goes too far to position C2. A better play would have been to come of the end rail, using the
increased margin-for-error effect demonstrated on VENT-II. Another option could have been to take a natural
path off 3 rails to the 2. Regardless, to be strategic, one must always reevaluate the table with an open mind
to look for creative opportunities, especially when “Plan A” doesn’t work out.

     There are several reasonable options from CB position C2. You could bank the 2 cross side; and with the
3 close to the side, the pocket plays much bigger than normal. You could also attempt to bank the 2 cross
corner, which is attractive since with a miss you could easily leave the 2 safe. Another really creative option
is to play a carom off the 2 to go for the 9. This is actually a good 3-way shot since you have a chance to
pocket the 9 for the win, pocket the 2 cross corner to stay at the table, or leave the CB hidden from the 2 if
you miss both. Bob makes a good effort on the video, almost making both the 2 and 9, and he left the 2 safe.
If he had made the 2, he would have had a shot at the 3. You should always walk around the table to look for
creative and smart opportunities like this.

                                         Diagram 1 First ball layout

Billiards Digest                                                                                    December, 2017
    Diagram 2 shows the ball layout for the 2nd shot in online video NV I.4. The gray grid and dotted lines
show the exact ball positions, alignments and angles so you can accurately judge shot options. Study the ball
layout and ask yourself what you would do in this situation. Also, how many different ways do you think you
could play this shot? Five … seven … ten? I came up with 21 different options! And four more were
suggested by others after I posted video demonstrations online. Here’s a list of all of the 25 different shot
options:
         (1) 1 in side with long-side shape on 2
         (2) 1 in corner with short-side shape on 2
         (3) 1 in corner, playing for bank on 2
         (4) 1 into 3-4, hide behind 2
         (5) 1 down table, hide behind 8
         (6) kiss 1 off 9 into corner
         (7) combo 1 into 9 for win
         (8) combo 1 into 9, with possible kiss off 7
         (9) hide behind 8, send 1 into 3-4
         (10) hide 1 behind 3-4, with distance
         (11) hide 1 behind 3-4 with slight break out
         (12) hide 1 behind 3-4 with slight break out and roll forward
         (13) 1 in corner, follow to break out 3-4
         (14) 1 in corner, draw off cushion to long side of 2
         (15) 1 in corner, draw off cushion to short side of 2
         (16) 1 in corner, draw off cushion to short side of 2 for follow forward
         (17) hit 1 into 3-4 cluster and hide behind 7-9
         (18) hide CB from 1 using 7-9 blockers
         (19) 1 in corner, follow for shape on 2
         (20) after 1 and 2, kiss 3 off 4 to pocket 3-5 combo
         (21) after 1 and 2, play safety on 3
         (22) bank 1 into 4 to throw 3 into corner
         (23) 1 in corner, follow with inside to break out 3-4 rail first for better shape on 2
         (24) 1 into and/or behind 8, CB by 5
         (25) 1 in corner, play safe on 2 (CB behind 9 and/or 2 behind 3-4)

    Option 4 is illustrated in the diagram. Watch online video NV I.12 to see demonstrations of options 1-21.
After you watch all of the options, which do you think is the best? And did your choice change after watching
the video? The best choice will obviously depend on the person.

Billiards Digest                                                                               December, 2017
                                            Diagram 2 Second ball layout

     I hope you are enjoying my series of articles dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-
ball (VENT).” If you want to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV I.1
through NV I.11. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV I.1 – Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT) Instructional DVD Trailer
                    NV I.2 – 9-ball Side Soft Break, and Corey Deuel Pattern Racking, an excerpt from VENT-I
                    NV I.3 – How to Train a Pool Table for Accurate and Consistent Ball Racking, an excerpt from
                         VENT-I
                    NV I.4 – How to be Creative and Consider Various Options in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt
                         from VENT-II
                    NV I.5 – Defensive Strategy in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-II
                    NV I.6 – Common Two-Rail Position Plays in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-III
normal video        NV I.7 – Common End-Game Patterns in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-III
                    NV I.8 – 9-ball/10-ball Object Ball Hide Safety Examples, an excerpt from VENT-IV
                    NV I.9 – 9-ball/10-ball Ball-In-Hand Shot Option Examples, an excerpt from VENT-IV
                    NV I.10 – 9-ball/10-ball Rail Cut Shot Principles and Examples, an excerpt from VENT-V
                    NV I.11 – 9-ball/10-ball Advanced Herd and Cushion-Compression Shots, an excerpt from
                         VENT-V
                    NV I.12 - VENT-II 9-Ball Layout With 21 Different Shot Options! Which Do You Like Best?

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     December, 2017
Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor and author of the book: The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards and the instructional DVD series: Video Encyclopedias of Pool Shots (VEPS), Pool
Practice (VEPP), Eight Ball (VEEB), and Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT), How to Aim Pool Shots
(HAPS) and Billiard University (BU), all available at: DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                     December, 2017
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vent_part_iv_defensive_strategy.pdf
title: VENT Part Iv Defensive Strategy
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VENT – Part IV: Defensive Strategy”                                        ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu.
The reference numbers used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the fourth article in a series dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball
(VENT),” a five-disc instructional-DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett.
VENT teaches all of the skills, knowledge and strategy one needs to excel at 9-ball and 10-ball. Topics
include break shot strategy and effects, game planning, position play and english, safety play, and advanced
principles, shots, and strategies. An outline of the entire VENT series along with video excerpts from each
DVD can be viewed online at: DrDaveBilliards.com/vent.

    The topic for this month is basic defensive strategy, featuring the two shots demonstrated in online video
NV I.5 (an excerpt from Disc II of VENT). Diagram 1 shows the layout for the first shot. Just looking at the
starting ball positions (and not the shot choices shown), what would you do in this situation? The 8-9 cluster
must be broken out to win. The 5-ball shot is fairly straight, but it would be possible to use a firm stun shot to
break out the cluster. It is also possible to follow forward to get the break out, but both of these shots would
be difficult. And there is no guarantee to get a good look at the 6 after the break out. Also, no easy offensive
shot is available on the 6, even with good cue ball (CB) position. A better approach with this ball layout might
be a defensive sequence, starting with the 5-ball shot.

     Whenever you don’t think a run-out is high-percentage, you should consider a defensive play as early as
possible. Here, as shown in Diagram 1, a good option is to draw back from the 5 to get good shape on the 6
for a strategic safety. The goal is to position the CB to be able to hit the 6 into the 8 to break out the cluster
and hide the CB behind the 7. Obviously, it is best to get the CB close to the 7 to prevent a possible jump
shot at the 6. With the final ball layout shown in the diagram, with only tough kick shots at the 6 available, a
decent player would definitely be the favorite to win … against any player.

                                         Diagram 1 Play for a safety

Billiards Digest                                                                                      January, 2018
     Diagram 2 shows the layout for the second sequence. The first shot is shown on the left side of the
diagram, where the goal is to hide the 6 behind the 9 with a thin hit on the 6. Even with a fairly good hit on
this shot, the opponent has a chance to play an even more-effective safety. The play is shown on the right
side of the diagram, where the CB is kicked off the cushion to get a thin hit on the 6 to lock it up behind the 9.
The shot sequence is demonstrated in online video NV I.5. With the final ball positions shown in the diagram,
the opponent is a favorite to win. Always try to anticipate what your opponent might do in return when you are
deciding what type of safety to play. If your safety attempt allows for an even more-effective safety, it might
be better to choose a different option from the start.

                      Diagram 2 Don’t play a safe that will allow an even-better safe

     Many more examples of a variety of defensive safety opportunities and strategies are presented on Disc
II of VENT. The categories and approaches include: playing for a safety, choosing a hard shot over a hard
safety, choosing a safety instead of a tough position play, not playing a safe that will allow an even-better
safe. And advanced defensive play and strategy are covered in more detail on Disc IV (Safety Play) and Disc
V (Advanced Principles, Shots, Strategies).

     I hope you are enjoying my series of articles dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-
ball (VENT).” If you want to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV I.1
through NV I.11. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                                      January, 2018
                    NV I.1 – Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT) Instructional DVD Trailer
                    NV I.2 – 9-ball Side Soft Break, and Corey Deuel Pattern Racking, an excerpt from VENT-I
                    NV I.3 – How to Train a Pool Table for Accurate and Consistent Ball Racking, an excerpt from
                         VENT-I
                    NV I.4 – How to be Creative and Consider Various Options in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt
                         from VENT-II
                    NV I.5 – Defensive Strategy in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-II
normal video
                    NV I.6 – Common Two-Rail Position Plays in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-III
                    NV I.7 – Common End-Game Patterns in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-III
                    NV I.8 – 9-ball/10-ball Object Ball Hide Safety Examples, an excerpt from VENT-IV
                    NV I.9 – 9-ball/10-ball Ball-In-Hand Shot Option Examples, an excerpt from VENT-IV
                    NV I.10 – 9-ball/10-ball Rail Cut Shot Principles and Examples, an excerpt from VENT-V
                    NV I.11 – 9-ball/10-ball Advanced Herd and Cushion-Compression Shots, an excerpt from
                         VENT-V

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor and author of the book: The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards and the instructional DVD series: Video Encyclopedias of Pool Shots (VEPS), Pool
Practice (VEPP), Eight Ball (VEEB), and Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT), How to Aim Pool Shots
(HAPS) and Billiard University (BU), all available at: DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       January, 2018
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vent_part_ix_rail_cut_shot_effects.pdf
title: VENT Part Ix Rail Cut Shot Effects
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VENT – Part IX: Rail Cut Shot Effects”                                      ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles are available at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the ninth article in a series dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball
(VENT),” a five-disc instructional DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett.
VENT teaches all of the skills, knowledge and strategy one needs to excel at 9-ball and 10-ball. Topics
include racking and breaking strategy and effects, game planning, position play and english, safety play, and
advanced principles, shots, and strategies. An outline of the entire VENT series along with video excerpts
from each DVD are available online at DrDaveBilliards.com/vent.

     The topic for this month is rail cut shots, where the object ball (OB) is frozen to a cushion, featuring shots
demonstrated in online video NV I.10 (an excerpt from Disc V of VENT). Some people, books, and videos
often give the advice that one should hit the cushion and OB at the same time with rail cut shots. This is valid
advice for a shot with gearing outside english, but not for any other shots unless the OB is close to the pocket
or if the pocket plays large.

     Diagram 1 shows a good example where if you hit the ball and cushion at the same time using stun to
send the cue ball (CB) straight up table for the 8, you will miss the shot badly. With a simultaneous hit, the
CB will throw the 7 into the cushion causing the 7 to rebound off the cushion away from the pocket. We have
a very clear and convincing demonstration of this in online video NV I.10. Remember, throw is largest with a
stun shot. If you are not very familiar with throw concepts (or gearing outside english), see the “adjusting aim
for throw” section in the “Online Pool Tutorial” at billiards.colostate.edu.

                                 Diagram 1 Cushion-first rail cut-shot throw

     This shot can be pocketed with stun, but you must hit the cushion first, just in front of the 7. The CB will
hit the 7 while compressing the cushion, causing a slight overcut (see the angled “line of centers” in the

Billiards Digest                                                                                         June, 2018
diagram), but throw will push the 7 back on line. You could also hit the cushion a little farther in front of the 7,
where the CB hits the 7 after compressing and rebounding off the cushion causing a cut and throw in the
other direction, but this approach will be very sensitive to shot speed and cushion conditions. Generally, the
best approach is the first, where you simply aim to overcut the shot slightly and hit the 7 as the CB is
compressing the cushion.

     Diagram 2 shows another example where you need a cushion-first hit to get shape on the next ball. You
are shooting at the 5, which is frozen to the cushion, and you need to get up table for a shot at the 6 next.
You could use straight draw but you might hit the 7 or scratch in the side. The 8, 9, and 10 also make it
difficult to go forward with or without running english. The right play here is to stun across the table with left
sidespin to send the CB up table off the opposite cushion. If you hit the 5 first or hit the 5 while compressing
the cushion, the sidespin will take on the cushion after the hit causing the CB to head down table, where you
might hit the 8 or 9. So here you need to hit the cushion first, hitting the 5 after the CB has mostly rebounded
off the cushion. The demonstration and slow motion footage in online video NV I.10 clearly shows the CB
interacting with the cushion before hitting the 5.

                             Diagram 2 Cushion-first rail cut-shot position play

    The distance in front of the ball you must hit the cushion will vary with cushion conditions, angle into the
cushion, and shot speed. With soft cushions and/or shallow angles into the rail, and/or fast speed, you will
need to aim farther in front of the ball. And for stiff cushions and/or steep angles into the rail, and/or slow
speed, you will need to aim closer to the ball. With the shot in Diagram 2, I needed to aim farther in front of
the ball than you might expect. That is partly because of the shallow angle into the rail and the fast speed of
the shot, but it is also because the cushions on my table are very soft and compress more than normal.
Diagram 3 shows a still frame close-up from slow motion video of the shot. Look at how far in front of the 5-
ball I am aiming. In the diagram, the CB has reached close to maximum cushion compression. After
rebounding, the CB overcut the 5 slightly, but the 5 still easily went into the pocket. Again, at softer speed, or
on a table with stiffer cushions, or at a steeper angle into the rail, I would need to aim much closer to the 5;
but with this shot on this table, I needed to hit the cushion well in front of the ball to get the desired hit.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          June, 2018
                                                  Diagram 3 @@@

     The shots illustrated in this article are demonstrated in online video NV I.10. Try them out the next time
you practice. Reading is good, and watching is better, but doing is best. And if you want to learn more about
rail cut shot effects and techniques, see the “rail cut shots” FAQ page at billiards.colostate.edu. And VENT-
V (“Advanced Principles, Shots, Strategies”) includes many more examples of these and other effects and
techniques in a wide range of categories including: combos, kisses, caroms, rail cut shots, bank shots,
advanced shots, and run-out examples.

     I hope you are enjoying my series of articles dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-
ball (VENT).” If you want to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV I.1
through NV I.11. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV I.1 – Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT) Instructional DVD Trailer
                   NV I.2 – 9-ball Side Soft Break, and Corey Deuel Pattern Racking, an excerpt from VENT-I
                   NV I.3 – How to Train a Pool Table for Accurate and Consistent Ball Racking, an excerpt from
                        VENT-I
                   NV I.4 – How to be Creative and Consider Various Options in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt
                        from VENT-II
                   NV I.5 – Defensive Strategy in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-II
normal video
                   NV I.6 – Common Two-Rail Position Plays in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-III
                   NV I.7 – Common End-Game Patterns in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-III
                   NV I.8 – 9-ball/10-ball Object Ball Hide Safety Examples, an excerpt from VENT-IV
                   NV I.9 – 9-ball/10-ball Ball-In-Hand Shot Option Examples, an excerpt from VENT-IV
                   NV I.10 – 9-ball/10-ball Rail Cut Shot Principles and Examples, an excerpt from VENT-V
                   NV I.11 – 9-ball/10-ball Advanced Herd and Cushion-Compression Shots, an excerpt from
                        VENT-V

Billiards Digest                                                                                        June, 2018
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   June, 2018
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vent_part_v_two_rail_position_plays.pdf
title: VENT Part V Two Rail Position Plays
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VENT – Part V: Two-Rail Position Plays”                                    ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles are available at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers
used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the fifth article in a series dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT),”
a five-disc instructional DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett. VENT
teaches all of the skills, knowledge and strategy one needs to excel at 9-ball and 10-ball. Topics include
break shot strategy and effects, game planning, position play and english, safety play, and advanced
principles, shots, and strategies. An outline of the entire VENT series along with video excerpts from each
DVD are available online at DrDaveBilliards.com/vent.

     The topic for this month is important and common two-rail position plays, featuring shots demonstrated in
online video NV I.6 (an excerpt from Disc III of VENT). Diagram 1 shows the layout for the first shot where
the goal is to pocket the 8 and get position on the 9. Here, a good option is the shot illustrated in the diagram,
where the cue ball (CB) goes across the table twice in a pattern shaped like the letter “Z.” This is a good play
because the CB heads right into the line of the 9 ball shot, providing a large margin for error with shot speed.
As illustrated in Diagram 2, a wide range of speeds will result in a good shot at the 9.

                                 Diagram 1 “Z” shot two-rail position play

Billiards Digest                                                                                     February, 2018
                          Diagram 2 “Z” shot large margin for error with speed

     Diagram 3 shows the layout for the second shot, where the goal is to pocket the 6 and get shape on the
7. Online video NV I.6 demonstrates several reasonable options for this layout. One shot option is illustrated
in the diagram, where running english and draw are used to come off two rails into the line of the 7. Another
good option is illustrated in Diagram 4, where inside follow is used to go two rails beneath the 8 and 9. This
option is natural, and the braking action off the last cushion helps provide a good margin for error with shot
speed. Check out the online video and try the shots yourself to see what might be your preferred choice. It is
important to practice a wide range of position play shots and options so you will be more likely to make smart
choices when you play.

                         Diagram 3 Two-rail shape into the line of the next shot

Billiards Digest                                                                                 February, 2018
                              Diagram 4 Natural two-rail shape underneath a blocker.

     Many more examples of a variety of common and useful two-rail position plays are presented in NV I.6
and on Disc III of VENT. The categories and approaches covered on VENT-III (“Position Play and English”)
include no-rail shape, one-rail shape, two-rail shape, three-rail shape, position off pocket hangers, straight-in
shot options, and end-game patterns.

     I hope you are enjoying my series of articles dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-
ball (VENT).” If you want to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV I.1
through NV I.11. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV I.1 – Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT) Instructional DVD Trailer
                   NV I.2 – 9-ball Side Soft Break, and Corey Deuel Pattern Racking, an excerpt from VENT-I
                   NV I.3 – How to Train a Pool Table for Accurate and Consistent Ball Racking, an excerpt from
                        VENT-I
                   NV I.4 – How to be Creative and Consider Various Options in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt
                        from VENT-II
                   NV I.5 – Defensive Strategy in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-II
normal video
                   NV I.6 – Common Two-Rail Position Plays in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-III
                   NV I.7 – Common End-Game Patterns in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-III
                   NV I.8 – 9-ball/10-ball Object Ball Hide Safety Examples, an excerpt from VENT-IV
                   NV I.9 – 9-ball/10-ball Ball-In-Hand Shot Option Examples, an excerpt from VENT-IV
                   NV I.10 – 9-ball/10-ball Rail Cut Shot Principles and Examples, an excerpt from VENT-V
                   NV I.11 – 9-ball/10-ball Advanced Herd and Cushion-Compression Shots, an excerpt from
                        VENT-V

Billiards Digest                                                                                     February, 2018
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor and author of the book: The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards and the instructional DVD series: Video Encyclopedias of Pool Shots (VEPS), Pool
Practice (VEPP), Eight Ball (VEEB), and Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT), How to Aim Pool Shots
(HAPS) and Billiard University (BU), all available at: DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                February, 2018
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vent_part_vi_end_game_patterns.pdf
title: VENT Part Vi End Game Patterns
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VENT – Part VI: End-Game Patterns”                                          ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles are available at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers
used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the sixth article in a series dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT),”
a five-disc instructional DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett. VENT
teaches all of the skills, knowledge and strategy one needs to excel at 9-ball and 10-ball. Topics include
break shot strategy and effects, game planning, position play and english, safety play, and advanced
principles, shots, and strategies. An outline of the entire VENT series along with video excerpts from each
DVD are available online at DrDaveBilliards.com/vent.

    The topic for this month is end-game patterns, featuring shots demonstrated in online video NV I.7 (an
excerpt from Disc III of VENT). The focus is on pocketing the last two balls of a 9-ball or 10-ball game. End-
game patterns are very important, and you must practice them. A good player needs to be able to plan
position and finish a game confidently.

     The End-Game Pattern section on VENT-III shows the best ways to get from the 8 to the 9 with the cue
ball (CB) and 8 in different places on the table. The 9 is always placed in its racked position since, as shown
on VENT-I, the 9 shouldn’t move on the break with a good rack unless it is kissed, which doesn’t happen
often. As always, with every ball layout shown, ask yourself how you would play it before you read or look at
what I recommend.

    Diagram 1 shows common end-game patterns where the 2nd-to-last ball (the 8) is close to the foot rail.
Obviously, the goal is to pocket the 8 and get position on the 9 for the win. From CB position C1, the natural
angle heads in the perfect direction into the line of the 9 so the best play is to just roll the ball. Any time you
can roll the CB forward for natural shape into the line of the next shot, this is usually the best play.

     From CB position C2, with the small cut angle, a good play is to follow forward with inside english off two
rails. This shot is coming across the line of the 9 ball shot, but it is fairly easy to control follow distance.
Although, when using running english like this, you need to be careful to not use too much speed. As
demonstrated in online video NV I.7, an alternative at this angle is to draw with outside english off two rails.
This approach is a little tougher to control for most people. From CB position C3, the angle into the cushion is
steep enough to roll the CB with outside english to create a good line into the 9 ball shot. Another option is to
use inside follow to take a line similar to the shot from CB position C1. An advantage of outside english is
that it can limit or prevent throw, even with cling or skid. For more information, see the “gearing outside
english” resource page in the “english (sidespin)” FAQ page at billiards.colostate.edu.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        March, 2018
                                  Diagram 1 Foot-Rail End-Game Patterns

    Diagram 2 shows common end-game patterns where the 8 is close to the side rail. Again, the goal is to
pocket the 8 and get position on the 9 for the win. From CB position C1, it is easy to kill the CB with slow stun
and right sidespin. This type of shot is better than a straight shot at the 8 because it is easy to execute and it
gets the CB a little closer to the 9 than a straight draw shot would. Even with a bigger angle, as shown from
CB position C2, it is still possible to hold the CB. Depending on equipment conditions, it is also possible to
hold the CB at an even larger angle, as demonstrated in online video NV I.7.

     A more natural play with a medium to large cut angle, as from CB position C3, is to go across the table by
rolling the CB with a touch of outside english. This is a very easy shot to execute and control. Coming off the
2nd rail increases the margin for error with shot speed, due to the braking action of the cushion. Outside
english is required on this shot to get the desired line across the table, but it also has the added benefit of
limiting or preventing throw, as mentioned above. As demonstrated in online video NV I.7, when the angle is
even bigger, the right play is to roll across the table twice, to the other side of the 9.

Billiards Digest                                                                                       March, 2018
                                      Diagram 2 Side-Rail End-Game Patterns

    Be sure to practice common end-game patterns like the ones in this article. You want to be able to finish
games confidently and consistently. Many more examples from various CB and 8 ball positions are
presented in the “End-Game Patterns” section of VENT-III. Other categories and approaches covered on
VENT-III (“Position Play and English”) include no-rail shape, one-rail shape, two-rail shape, three-rail shape,
position off pocket hangers, and straight-in shot options.

     I hope you are enjoying my series of articles dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-
ball (VENT).” If you want to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV I.1
through NV I.11. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV I.1 – Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT) Instructional DVD Trailer
                   NV I.2 – 9-ball Side Soft Break, and Corey Deuel Pattern Racking, an excerpt from VENT-I
                   NV I.3 – How to Train a Pool Table for Accurate and Consistent Ball Racking, an excerpt from
                        VENT-I
                   NV I.4 – How to be Creative and Consider Various Options in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt
                        from VENT-II
                   NV I.5 – Defensive Strategy in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-II
normal video
                   NV I.6 – Common Two-Rail Position Plays in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-III
                   NV I.7 – Common End-Game Patterns in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-III
                   NV I.8 – 9-ball/10-ball Object Ball Hide Safety Examples, an excerpt from VENT-IV
                   NV I.9 – 9-ball/10-ball Ball-In-Hand Shot Option Examples, an excerpt from VENT-IV
                   NV I.10 – 9-ball/10-ball Rail Cut Shot Principles and Examples, an excerpt from VENT-V
                   NV I.11 – 9-ball/10-ball Advanced Herd and Cushion-Compression Shots, an excerpt from
                        VENT-V

Billiards Digest                                                                                       March, 2018
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                  March, 2018
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vent_part_vii_safety_play.pdf
title: VENT Part Vii Safety Play
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VENT – Part VII: Safety Play”                                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles are available at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers
used in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the seventh article in a series dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball
(VENT),” a five-disc instructional DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett.
VENT teaches all of the skills, knowledge and strategy one needs to excel at 9-ball and 10-ball. Topics
include racking and breaking strategy and effects, game planning, position play and english, safety play, and
advanced principles, shots, and strategies. An outline of the entire VENT series along with video excerpts
from each DVD are available online at DrDaveBilliards.com/vent.

    The topic for this month is safety play, featuring shots demonstrated in online video NV I.8 (an excerpt
from Disc IV of VENT). The focus is on object ball (OB) hide safeties common in the games of 9-ball or 10-
bal. Diagram 1 shows the first example where there is no easy shot at the 5 or an easy run-out, but the 6, 8,
and 9 provide a large “wall” of blockers. A good plan is to bank the 5 behind the blockers for a safety.
Generally, it is desirable to get the 5 close to the blockers to prevent a one-rail kick escape by our opponent.
However, position “A” would be a bad place to leave the 5 because there is enough room between the 6 and
8 for our opponent to get a direct hit. A safer play that avoids this possibility is to leave the 5 well behind the
blockers in position “B.” However, as illustrated in Diagram 2, leaving the OB about a ball off a cushion is
about the worst place to leave an OB when playing safe. The effective size of the ball is huge since a wide
range of cue ball (CB) directions and angles will result in a hit. The two paths shown in Diagram 2, and any
path in between, will give our opponent an easy kick at the “big ball.”

    Position “C” in Diagram 1 is a much better target for the safety shot. There is a fairly large area behind
the 8 and 9 that will hide the 5. And by getting the 5 close to the 9, our opponent would be forced to shoot a
two-rail kick requiring much more precision than the kick in Diagram 2. All of the shots illustrated here are
demonstrated in online video NV I.8. Try them out the next time you practice.

                                       Diagram 1 First safety example

Billiards Digest                                                                                         April, 2018
                                          Diagram 2 “Big ball” effect

     Diagram 3 shows another example where the shot on the 5 is difficult and you might choose to play safe
instead of attempting the risky shot. One option is to bank the 5 one rail into position “A” with the CB ending
in position “1.” This could work, but there is a fairly small margin for error and we could leave a direct look or
easy one-rail kick at the 5 if either the CB or 5-ball position is off slightly. This is because the 6-8-7 blockers
are in line with the CB and 5-ball, making the effective size of the blockers small. A much better approach is
to stop the CB in place and bank the 5 off two rails into positions “B,” “C,” or “D.” It is easier to predict the
final position of the CB, and this OB path comes into the widest direction of the blockers with a large margin
for error with speed. Coming up short of position “B” or long of position “D” still produces a good result.

     In Diagram 3, if the angle off the rail is off a little, the 5 could end up in position “E.” Not only does this
create a “big ball” as described above, it also opens up the opportunity for a kick-and-stick safety as shown in
Diagram 4. Your opponent just needs to roll the CB with left sidespin to get a square hit and stop on the 5. A
ball rolling nearly straight into a cushion comes off the cushion with stun. This results in a hide behind the
heart of the blockers, a large distance to the OB, and the 5 out in the open, away from the rails, where it is a
smaller target. This is a good example of how important it is to carefully plan your safety, anticipating what
your opponent might do in response, and then strive to leave your opponent as bad as possible.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          April, 2018
                                    Diagram 3 Second safety example

                                 Diagram 4 “Kick and stick” safety reply

     Be sure to dedicate practice time to common safety plays and replies like the ones in this article and on
VENT-IV (“Safety Play”), which includes many examples in a wide range of categories including: CB hide
safeties, OB hide safeties, other defensive safeties, offensive safeties, end-game safeties, ball-in-hand
strategy, and safety replies. Solid safety and defensive play is what really separates the great players from
good players.
Billiards Digest                                                                                     April, 2018
     I hope you are enjoying my series of articles dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-
ball (VENT).” If you want to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV I.1
through NV I.11. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                    NV I.1 – Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT) Instructional DVD Trailer
                    NV I.2 – 9-ball Side Soft Break, and Corey Deuel Pattern Racking, an excerpt from VENT-I
                    NV I.3 – How to Train a Pool Table for Accurate and Consistent Ball Racking, an excerpt from
                         VENT-I
                    NV I.4 – How to be Creative and Consider Various Options in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt
                         from VENT-II
                    NV I.5 – Defensive Strategy in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-II
normal video
                    NV I.6 – Common Two-Rail Position Plays in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-III
                    NV I.7 – Common End-Game Patterns in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-III
                    NV I.8 – 9-ball/10-ball Object Ball Hide Safety Examples, an excerpt from VENT-IV
                    NV I.9 – 9-ball/10-ball Ball-In-Hand Shot Option Examples, an excerpt from VENT-IV
                    NV I.10 – 9-ball/10-ball Rail Cut Shot Principles and Examples, an excerpt from VENT-V
                    NV I.11 – 9-ball/10-ball Advanced Herd and Cushion-Compression Shots, an excerpt from
                         VENT-V

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          April, 2018
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vent_part_viii_ball_in_hand_options.pdf
title: VENT Part Viii Ball In Hand Options
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VENT – Part VIII: Ball-In-Hand Options”                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles are available at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the eighth article in a series dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball
(VENT),” a five-disc instructional DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett.
VENT teaches all of the skills, knowledge and strategy one needs to excel at 9-ball and 10-ball. Topics
include racking and breaking strategy and effects, game planning, position play and english, safety play, and
advanced principles, shots, and strategies. An outline of the entire VENT series along with video excerpts
from each DVD are available online at DrDaveBilliards.com/vent.

    Last month, we looked at examples of creative and effective safety play, the goal of which is to force your
opponent to foul, giving you ball in hand. The topic for this month is how to be creative and effective with ball
in hand, featuring shots demonstrated in online video NV I.9 (an excerpt from Disc IV of VENT).

    Diagram 1 shows an example ball-in-hand safety where there is an opportunity for early win by setting up
the 9 ball. A run-out is difficult due to the need to break out the 5-7 cluster and get position on the 4. As
shown in the diagram, a good alternative is to send the 3 down table for a future combination on the 9 while
locking up the cue ball (CB) behind the cluster. The goal is to leave the 3 in position “A,” offering a straight
combo shot on the 9. In the video, the CB went a little long to position “B;” but with the CB locked up behind
the 5 the shot is still an excellent safety since our opponent is very unlikely to get a hit on the 3. With ball in
hand, there is an option to play either a combo or a carom on the 9. A natural-angle carom is available, but
the combo is a better option since the CB can be placed close to the 3, lined up perfectly in the desired
direction, making it is easy to get an accurate hit on the 9.

                               Diagram 1 Ball-in-hand safety for an early win

Billiards Digest                                                                                          May, 2018
     Diagram 2 shows a layout where ball in hand can be used to attempt to force our opponent into three
consecutive fouls for a win. This example was inspired by the famous shot sequence from a 2006 match
between Luong Dung and Vilmos Foldes (available online at: youtu.be/Ja9y8Lv_A1s). In online video NV I.9,
I fouled on the previous shot, giving Bob ball in hand, so I am currently on one foul. Bob does not have a
reasonable chance to run out or play an effective safety, so he decides to use an intentional foul, hitting the 7
to tie up the 2. With the 7, 8, and 3 totally surrounding the 2, I have no reasonable chance to get a legal hit,
even with ball in hand, unless I can hit a precision jump into the 2. Therefore, Bob will have me on two
consecutive fouls, with ball in hand again. I need to make sure Bob can’t easily surround the 2 again for my
third consecutive foul; so with ball in hand, I decide to break up the cluster while still leaving the 2 and 3 tied
up. The resulting ball layout is shown in Diagram 3.

                       Diagram 2 Ball-in-hand 3-consecutive-foul strategy – layout 1

     Since I was on two fouls, Bob decided to play safe again to attempt to get me on a 3rd foul, which would
give him the win. As shown in Diagram 3, Bob placed the CB very close to the 2 and used a thin hit to send
the CB behind the 4-9 cluster, not moving the 2 or 3 very much. Bob was shooting for CB position “A,” but
ended up a little short in position “B.” At this point, before I attempt the shot that could result in a 3rd foul, Bob
must inform me that I am on two fouls. (“Dave, you’re on two fouls.”) Unfortunately for him, he left me a look
at the edge of the 2. If Bob had sent the CB a bit farther, I probably would not have been able to get a hit on
the 2 and I would have lost the game. From CB position “B,” I attempted to thin the 2 for a return safety, as
shown by the dashed CB path. I was attempting to leave the CB in position “C,” but it went a little long to
position “D.” I didn’t get the hide, but at least I averted the 3rd consecutive-foul loss. Unfortunately for me,
from CB position “D,” Bob was able to play an even better safety on me by thinning the 2 with a rail-first hit,
hiding the CB behind the 4-9 cluster, as shown in Diagram 4.

Billiards Digest                                                                                            May, 2018
                      Diagram 3 Ball-in-hand 3-consecutive-foul strategy – layout 2

     With the ball layout in Diagram 4, I might have been able to get a hit on the 2 with a long kick shot off the
head rail, but I decided to use an intentional foul instead to send the 3 up table to make it more difficult for
Bob to run out the balls. My shot plan was to kick at the 3, as shown in the diagram. I just needed to make
sure I did not break out the 4-9 cluster. Bob will have ball in hand since I hit the 3 first, but the run-out is not
trivial from the final ball layout in the diagram. Bob would need to break out the 4-9 cluster, get a shot at the
3, and then get a shot at the 4, wherever it might end up after the break-out shot. This would certainly not be
automatic. Sometimes, intentional fouls like the ones used in this example can provide creative solutions to
difficult situations.

Billiards Digest                                                                                           May, 2018
                           Diagram 4 Ball-in-hand 3-consecutive-foul strategy – layout 3

    All of the shots illustrated in this article are demonstrated in online video NV I.9. Try them out the next
time you practice. Reading is good, but doing is better. Be sure to dedicate practice time to safety and ball-
in-hand strategy and execution. VENT-IV (“Safety Play”) includes many examples in a wide range of
categories including: CB hide safeties, OB hide safeties, other defensive safeties, offensive safeties, end-
game safeties, ball-in-hand strategy, and safety replies. Solid safety and defensive play is what really
separates great players from good players.

     I hope you are enjoying my series of articles dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-
ball (VENT).” If you want to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online videos NV I.1
through NV I.11. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV I.1 – Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT) Instructional DVD Trailer
                   NV I.2 – 9-ball Side Soft Break, and Corey Deuel Pattern Racking, an excerpt from VENT-I
                   NV I.3 – How to Train a Pool Table for Accurate and Consistent Ball Racking, an excerpt from
                        VENT-I
                   NV I.4 – How to be Creative and Consider Various Options in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt
                        from VENT-II
                   NV I.5 – Defensive Strategy in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-II
normal video
                   NV I.6 – Common Two-Rail Position Plays in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-III
                   NV I.7 – Common End-Game Patterns in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-III
                   NV I.8 – 9-ball/10-ball Object Ball Hide Safety Examples, an excerpt from VENT-IV
                   NV I.9 – 9-ball/10-ball Ball-In-Hand Shot Option Examples, an excerpt from VENT-IV
                   NV I.10 – 9-ball/10-ball Rail Cut Shot Principles and Examples, an excerpt from VENT-V
                   NV I.11 – 9-ball/10-ball Advanced Herd and Cushion-Compression Shots, an excerpt from
                        VENT-V

Billiards Digest                                                                                         May, 2018
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   May, 2018
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vent_part_x_herd_and_compress.pdf
title: VENT Part X Herd And Compress
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VENT – Part X: Herd and Compress”                                           ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs
(TP), and all of my past articles are available at billiards.colostate.edu. Reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     This is the tenth and final article in a series dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball
(VENT),” a five-disc instructional DVD set I recently created with fellow Billiards Digest columnist Bob Jewett.
VENT teaches all of the skills, knowledge and strategy one needs to excel at 9-ball and 10-ball. Topics
include racking and breaking strategy and effects, game planning, position play and english, safety play, and
advanced principles, shots, and strategies. An outline of the entire VENT series along with video excerpts
from each DVD are available online at DrDaveBilliards.com/vent.

     The topic for this month is ball herding and rail compression shots, featuring shots demonstrated in online
video NV I.11 (an excerpt from Disc V of VENT). Diagram 1 shows two examples of ball herding shots,
where expected ball directions are changed by fast secondary contacts. The shot at the 5 on the left side of
the diagram is a good example where it would not be possible to pocket the 6 without secondary contact by
the cue ball (CB). The CB is aimed to carom off the 5 and then the cushion to hit the 6 which is moved
slightly by the 5. The action of the shot, which is shown in slow motion in online video NV I.11, allows the CB
to “herd” the 6-ball into the pocket.

     The shot on the right side of Diagram 1 is a similar example, where a direct carom off the 7 with a thin hit
into the 8 would send the 8 short of the pocket. However, the 7 is frozen to both the cushion and the 8, so if
you hit a little more of the 7, it will push the 8 out a little so the carom will pocket the ball. These herd shots
are not as difficult as you might think, but they do take a little practice. Try them out the next time you’re at a
table so you will be prepared to pocket shots like these if and when they come up in actual games.

                                        Diagram 1 Ball herding shots

Billiards Digest                                                                                          July, 2018
     Now let’s look at some shots where a ball must compress a cushion to get the necessary action.
Diagram 2 shows a classic example where the 7 is frozen to both the 8 and the cushion, so one might think it
is impossible to hit to the 7 without the 7 bumping into the 8 after rebounding off the cushion. However, with
enough speed, the 7 compresses the cushion enough to allow it to clear, in this case to bank the 7 in the
corner.

                              Diagram 2 Classic cushion compression shot

     Diagram 3 shows another shot not possible without compressing the cushion. The 6 is frozen to both the
cushion and the 8, so it looks like there is no way to combo the 8 into the corner because the line of centers
through the 6 and 8 does not head toward the pocket. However, with enough speed, the 6 will compress the
cushion enough before hitting the 8 to change the angle of the hit. If you view the shot in online video NV
I.11, you will notice that the 6 follows the 8 with about the same speed as the 8. Does this seem unusual to
you? And can you explain why it happens?

Billiards Digest                                                                                     July, 2018
                             Diagram 3 Interesting cushion-compression shot

     Diagram 4 shows some video stills from slow motion footage to answer the questions above. In frame
“a,” the CB is just about to hit the 6. In frame “b,” the 6 is compressing the cushion. In frame “c,” the 6 is
hitting the 8 along a shifted line while the cushion is still compressed. And in frame “d,” the 8 is gone with the
cushion continuing to push the 6 toward the 8. This push is why the 6 follows the 8.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         July, 2018
                   Diagram 4 Slow motion video frames of cushion compression shot

    The shots illustrated in this article are demonstrated in online video NV I.11. Try them out the next time
you practice. Reading is good, and watching is better, but doing is best. VENT-V (“Advanced Principles,
Shots, Strategies”) includes many more examples of ball herding and cushion compression shots along with
other shot types in a wide range of categories including: combos, kisses, caroms, rail cut shots, bank shots,
advanced shots, and run-out examples.

     I hope you enjoyed and learned from my series of articles dealing with the “Video Encyclopedia of Nine-
ball and Ten-ball (VENT).” If you want to view video excerpts from the entire DVD set, check out online
videos NV I.1 through NV I.11. Enjoy!

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                                     July, 2018
                    NV I.1 – Video Encyclopedia of Nine-ball and Ten-ball (VENT) Instructional DVD Trailer
                    NV I.2 – 9-ball Side Soft Break, and Corey Deuel Pattern Racking, an excerpt from VENT-I
                    NV I.3 – How to Train a Pool Table for Accurate and Consistent Ball Racking, an excerpt from
                         VENT-I
                    NV I.4 – How to be Creative and Consider Various Options in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt
                         from VENT-II
                    NV I.5 – Defensive Strategy in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-II
normal video
                    NV I.6 – Common Two-Rail Position Plays in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-III
                    NV I.7 – Common End-Game Patterns in 9-ball and 10-ball, an excerpt from VENT-III
                    NV I.8 – 9-ball/10-ball Object Ball Hide Safety Examples, an excerpt from VENT-IV
                    NV I.9 – 9-ball/10-ball Ball-In-Hand Shot Option Examples, an excerpt from VENT-IV
                    NV I.10 – 9-ball/10-ball Rail Cut Shot Principles and Examples, an excerpt from VENT-V
                    NV I.11 – 9-ball/10-ball Advanced Herd and Cushion-Compression Shots, an excerpt from
                         VENT-V

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary at billiards.colostate.edu.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Advanced Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          July, 2018
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vepp_part_i_introduction_and_fundamentals.pdf
title: VEPP Part I Introduction And Fundamentals
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEPP – Part I: Introduction and Fundamentals”                                ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

     I am very excited to start a new series of articles highlighting drills and principles from a project I recently
finished with fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett entitled: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).”
Like the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS)” series, which I released with past BD columnist Tom
Ross several years ago, VEPP is also a 5-disc instructional DVD collection. VEPP is an organized and
methodical training program and pool workout. It teaches you how to develop, assess, and track progress of
skills in all aspects of your game. VEPS showed all principles and shot types possible at the table and VEPP
shows you how to develop the skills required to apply the VEPS knowledge.

    An outline of the collection of drills Bob and I cataloged, organized into 5 major areas and 30 distinct
categories, is listed below. VEPP includes over 175 drills and challenges within the 30 categories. The
complete and detailed outline can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/vepp. Here’s the list of the
main categories:

VEPP I – Fundamentals and Basic CB Control
   1. Preliminaries and Fundamentals
   2. Aiming and Cut Shots
   3. Speed Control
   4. Stop Shot
   5. Follow Shot
   6. Draw Shot
   7. Follow and Draw

VEPP II –Position Control and English
   8. CB Control Basics
   9. Wagon Wheel Drills
   10. Basic Target Practice
   11. English Basics
   12. English Effects
   13. Position Control Basics
   14. Advanced Target Practice
   15. Center-of-Table Position
   16. Position Control Challenges

VEPP III – Patterns and Safety Play
   17. 9-ball and 8-ball Progressive Practice
   18. 9-ball Pattern Drills
   19. 8-ball Pattern Drills
   20. Safety Play

VEPP IV – Banks, Kicks, and Advanced Shots
   21. One-Rail Kicks
   22. Two-Rail Kicks

Billiards Digest                                                                                           April, 2012
     23. Three-Rail Kicks
     24. Banks
     25. Jacked-up Shots
     26. Jump Shots
     27. Massé Shots

VEPP V – Challenges, Games, and Advice
   28. Rating and Challenge Drills
   29. Drills For Special Skills
   30. Custom Drills
   31. Checking out a Table

      The list above is a good “catalog of skills” check list for evaluating your game. All of the skills listed are
important for a complete and well-rounded pool game. The drills and challenges in VEPP were designed to
help you evaluate and improve your skills in each area. Look down the list and ask yourself which might be
your weak areas. If you don’t know your deficiencies or don’t think you have any, well-designed drills can
help you do a reality check by providing an unbiased assessment and evaluation. Through this series of
articles, we’ll look at useful drills for many of the skill areas above. Let’s start with a couple of topics from the
first disc: “VEPP I – Fundamentals and Basic Position Control.”

    Probably one of the most important fundamentals for a solid pool game is having consistent and well-
positioned visual alignment. Diagram 1 illustrates a good drill to help you detect and correct possible issues
with visual alignment. Set up a long straight-in shot along the diagonal of the table. The object ball (OB)
should be equidistant from the cue ball (CB) and pocket for maximum challenge. Mark the CB and OB
positions with hole-reinforcement labels (“little white donuts”) to make it easy to repeat the drill. Shoot the
shot at least ten times, attempting to stop the CB in place with no side spin. Take note (or have a helper take
note) of what happens to the CB on each shot. Does it drift left or right? Does it have right or left sidespin?
Assuming your stroke is fairly consistent, if there is a consistent pattern to the shot imperfections, your visual
alignment might be off slightly.

                                        Diagram 1 “Vision center” drill

    Every person has a head position, usually fairly centered over the cue, that will allow him or her to best
visualize center-ball tip position and the straight line of a shot. We call this head position the person’s “vision

Billiards Digest                                                                                           April, 2012
center.” If your head is to the left or right of the “vision center” alignment, you will not likely perceive the line
of the shot or the center of the CB correctly. As illustrated in Diagram 2a, where the cue is aligned along the
straight line of the shot, if your head is to the right of your “vision center,” the cue will appear to be angled to
the right and you will typically compensate by angling your aim to the left (as indicated by the yellow line).
This will send the CB left of target, sending the OB to the right. As illustrated in Diagram 2b, if your head is to
the left of your “vision center,” the cue will appear to be angled to the left and you will typically compensate by
angling your aim to the right. This will send the CB right of target, sending the OB to the left. See my July ‘11
article for more information and additional illustrations related to this topic. NV C.1 demonstrates the drill and
illustrates the effects described above. The drill will help you find your personal “vision center,” and this
should allow you to perceive tip position and your line of aim more accurately, not just with straight shots, but
with all shots.

                                Diagram 2 Visual alignment perception errors

     Another important fundamental is a good pre-shot routine. On VEPP, we recommend that you
consciously practice and reinforce a consistent and purposeful pre-shot routine while working on drills. Doing
this will help you incorporate the routine as a natural part of your game when playing. NV C.2 provides some
good advice on things you might consider if your pre-shot routine is not well developed or complete. The
routine can vary from one player to the next, but here are some generally recommended guidelines:

     1. Visualize the Shot: Determine what CB motion and final position you want and think about the tip
        position and speed necessary to accomplish the shot.

     2. Chalk Up: Make it a habit to chalk the tip before each shot.

     3. Aim and Align: While still standing straight up, visualize the desired aim and get your head and vision
        into alignment with the line of the shot.

     4. Form Stance: Move your body and cue forward into the stance, keeping your vision aligned with the
        desired line of the shot.

Billiards Digest                                                                                           April, 2012
      5. Fiddle and Adjust: With your cue still, and with the tip close to the CB, make small adjustments in
         your cue alignment and tip position until you are confident you have the cue along the desired aiming
         line. If any big adjustments are required, go back to step 3.

      6. Warm up: Take some warm-up strokes to verify you can guide the cue along the desired line while
         staying relaxed.

      7. Pause and Verify: With the cue still again, recheck the tip position and cue alignment. At this point,
         you want to be confident and have no doubt or uncertainty concerning the shot. If you do, get up and
         start over.

      8. Focus on the Target: Before the final stroke, focus on your target (e.g., the center of the desired
         ghost-ball position or the contact point on the OB) and give your eyes time to settle.

      9. Stroke with Confidence: Now execute the final stroke with a slow backswing, non-rushed forward
         transition, and smoothly accelerating forward stroke, concentrating only on delivering the cue straight
         with the desired speed.

      10. Stay Down: Keep your head and body still during and after the final stroke.

And after every shot, be sure to diagnose how the shot went and take mental notes of what was off, if
anything. Again, the pre-shot routine guidelines are demonstrated in NV C.2. Be sure to view the video to
see how everything is applied at the table. And for more stroke advice, see the stroke “best practices”
resource page in the FAQ section of my website.

     I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles featuring drills from the “Video Encyclopedia of
Pool Practice (VEPP).” Example clips from the first VEPP DVD can be viewed on the VEPP website or at
billiards.colostate.edu under NV C.1 through NV C.4. Next month, we’ll look at a drill approach developed
by Bob Jewett called “progressive practice,” and I’ll present some useful draw shot challenge drills, also from
Disc I.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                      NV C.1 - "Vision center" alignment drill, from VEPP I
                      NV C.2 - Pre-shot routine recommendations, from VEPP I
normal video
                      NV C.3 - Progressive practice draw drills, from VEPP I
                      NV C.4 - Draw shot challenge drills, from VEPP I

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” and co-author of the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS)” and
“The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).”

Billiards Digest                                                                                        April, 2012
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vepp_part_ii_progressive_practice_and_draw_drills.pdf
title: VEPP Part Ii Progressive Practice And Draw Drills
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEPP – Part II: Progressive Practice, and Draw Drills”                      ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is my second article based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),” a five-disc
instructional DVD series I recently created with fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett. VEPP is an organized and
methodical training program and pool workout. It teaches you how to develop, assess, and track progress of
skills in all aspects of your game. An outline of the entire VEPP series and video excerpts from each DVD
can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/vepp. Last month, I introduced the series and looked at
visual alignment and pre-shot routine advice from the first disc: “VEPP I – Fundamentals and Basic Position
Control.” This month, I’ll present a drill approach called “progressive practice,” and show some useful draw
shot challenge drills, also from Disc I.

    “Progressive Practice” is a drill approach developed by Bob Jewett, where the difficulty level of the drill
adjusts automatically to match your skill level and improvement. Also, the result of each drill is a score that
offers a realistic assessment of your skill in a particular area. Many of the drills and workouts in VEPP are
designed around this approach. To better understand how progressive practice works, see Diagrams 1-3,
which show a set of draw drills of increasing difficulty.

     In the first drill (see Diagram 1a), the object ball (OB) is close to the corner pocket and the cue ball (CB)
starts one diamond up table. The goal is to pocket the OB and draw the CB past the first diamond up table.
You are allowed to draw back any amount, as long as you go past the first diamond. With each success,
move the CB up table one additional diamond. The diamond number indicates the current score for the drill.
With more distance to the OB, you will need to hit lower on the CB and/or use more speed to ensure there is
enough backspin at OB impact to create enough draw. If you miss the OB and/or don’t draw the CB back
past the first diamond, move the CB back down table half a diamond and continue the drill, moving the CB in
half-diamond increments with each success or failure. After 10-15 shots, the final CB position is your score
for the drill. For example, if you execute the shot shown in Diagram 1a and you have previously had a miss,
the current score for the drill would be 4.5 (a half diamond past position 4). See NV C.3 for a thorough
explanation and demonstration of the drill and how it is scored.

     Level two (see Diagram 1b) works the same as the first level, but now the goal is to draw back at least to
the starting position of the CB. Again, the set of drills is referred to as “progressive practice” because the
difficulty level increases within each drill and from one level to the next. As with all of the drills on VEPP, you
should record your scores and track your improvement over time. The “How to Use VEPP” document on the
VEPP website contains some sheets to help with this.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          May, 2012
                            7           6         5           4         3           2            1

                                                                                                         1

                   a.) draw drill - level 1                                   draw back past
                                                         move the CB         the first diamond
                                                                                                 initial CB
                                                           back with                              position
                                                         each success

                   b.) draw drill - level 2

                                  draw back at least
                                 to the start position
                                                                                                         2

                            7           6         5           4         3           2            1

                       Diagram 1 Progressive Practice Draw Drills – Levels 1 and 2

    In level three (see Diagram 2a), again you are required to draw back at least to the starting CB position,
but this time no more than two diamonds beyond. In level four (see Diagram 2b), the CB is always placed
two diamonds above the side pocket and the OB starts one diamond from the CB. Here, the OB advances
forward with each success. The goal is to pocket the OB and draw the CB back to within one diamond of the
foot rail. You are allowed to rebound off the cushion. With the higher level drills, the difficulty level grows
more quickly with each success. Again, if you fail to pocket the OB or draw the CB back to the target area,
move the OB back half a diamond and continue in half diamond increments, and record your score after 10-
15 attempts. Notice that the ball position numbers (and drill score) in level 4 correspond to the OB position.
This is different from the earlier levels that numbered the CB positions.

                            7           6         5           4         3           2            1

                                                                                                         3

                                      draw back past the start
                                    position within two diamonds

                                                  a.) draw drill - level 3

                                                  b.) draw drill - level 4               move the OB
                    draw back to within                                                   forward with
                   one diamond of the rail                                               each success
                                              fixed CB     initial OB
                                               position     position
                                                                                     4

                                                  1            2        3           4            5           6

                       Diagram 2 Progressive Practice Draw Drills – Levels 3 and 4

Billiards Digest                                                                                                 May, 2012
    Level five (see Diagram 3) is the final and most difficult level of the set of draw drills. It is identical to
level four, but here you must control the CB a little more precisely. The CB must end up within the one-
diamond box between the 1st and 2nd diamonds on the head rail. Here you need to develop a feel for tip
position, shot speed, and the angle of the shot. Again, advance the OB down table one diamond with each
success. And after the first failed attempt, move back half a diamond and continue in half diamond
increments. Don’t’ forget to record you score (the final OB position) and see how you improve over time. See
NV C.3 for a demonstration and further explanation of the entire set of drills.

                            7        6        5             4             3   2     1

                                                   draw drill - level 5

                                     draw back to within
                                   this one-diamond box

                                                                              5

                                               1            2             3   4     5         6

                           Diagram 3 Progressive Practice Draw Drills – Level 5

     As with all of the progressive practice drills on VEPP, if you routinely score high in the lower-level drills,
skip them in the future and go right to the higher level drills that give you more of a challenge. More
information on the progressive practice approach can be found on the progressive practice resource page
under “drills” in the FAQ section of my website.

     VEPP-I contains several more draw drills and a set of challenges to test your draw ability. Diagram 4
shows two draw challenges that are fun to practice and use as proposition shots. The “draw to the cushion”
challenge drill (see Diagram 4a) tests both your draw technique and speed control. The goal is to rebound
the OB off the foot cushion and draw the CB straight back to the head cushion without allowing the OB to
reach the head cushion. You are required to keep the cue as level as possible. Start with the OB one
diamond above the rail. From here, the challenge is very easy. With each success, shift the OB forward one
ball width and continue. Place the CB as close to the OB as you want. As with all progressive practice drills,
if you fail to draw the CB back to the cushion, or if the OB reaches the cushion, shift the OB back half a ball
and continue in half-ball increments. Continue for 10-15 attempts to find your limit. How far up table can you
go? On most tables, depending on cloth and cushion conditions, surpassing the head line is a good goal. As
we demonstrate in NV C.4, you can cheat by elevating the cue. With the cue jacked up, it is very easy to
draw the CB back while imparting little speed to the OB. Again, this isn’t allowed in this challenge drill, but it
is a good technique to know when you need it in a game situation.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          May, 2012
                           draw the CB back to the cushion
                          without the OB reaching the cushion
                                           1
                                                 move the OB forward with each success
                           initial OB
                            position           a.) “draw to the cushion” challenge

                                               b.) “race to the cushion” challenge
                                                                2

                           draw the CB back to the cushion
                          before the OB reaches the cushion

                                           Diagram 4 Draw Challenge Drills

     A related draw challenge is called “race to the cushion” (see Diagram 4b). The goal is to have the CB
reach the head cushion before the OB does. Start with the OB on the head line and move down table one
diamond with each success, changing to half-diamond increments (or smaller) after the first failed attempt.
For the best results, you want to hit the CB as low as possible, using just enough speed to draw the CB back
to the cushion. With typical equipment, a good goal is to advance the OB beyond the side pockets.

     I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles featuring drills from the “Video Encyclopedia of
Pool Practice (VEPP).” Example clips from the first VEPP DVD can be viewed on the VEPP website or at
billiards.colostate.edu under NV C.1 through NV C.4. Next month, I’ll present some useful drills from the
second disc: “VEPP II –Position Control and English.”

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                      NV C.1 - "Vision center" alignment drill, from VEPP I
                      NV C.2 - Pre-shot routine recommendations, from VEPP I
normal video
                      NV C.3 - Progressive practice draw drills, from VEPP I
                      NV C.4 - Draw shot challenge drills, from VEPP I

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” and co-author of the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS)” and
“The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).”

Billiards Digest                                                                                        May, 2012
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vepp_part_iii_wagon_wheel_drills.pdf
title: VEPP Part Iii Wagon Wheel Drills
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEPP – Part III: Wagon Wheel Drills”                                             ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is my third article based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),” a five-disc
instructional DVD series I recently created with fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett. VEPP is an organized and
methodical training program and pool workout. It teaches you how to develop, assess, and track progress of
skills for all aspects of your game. An outline of the entire VEPP series and video excerpts from each DVD
can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/vepp. In the last couple of articles, I introduced the series
and covered some fundamentals and draw shot drills from the first disc. This month, we’ll look at a useful
“wagon wheel” drill from Disc II: “VEPP II – Position Control and English.”

     “Wagon wheel” drills are very useful to help you practice and develop cue ball (CB) control skills.
Diagram 1 illustrates a common example. The name comes from the fact that, for a given shot, the CB can
be controlled to radiate out in a wide range of directions like spokes on a wagon wheel. Ted Brown was the
first billiards author to use the “wagon wheel” phrase. The goal of the drill in the diagram is to pocket the
object ball (OB) and control the CB direction and speed to gently hit each of the target balls (balls 1 through
11) along the rails. You have CB in hand for each target so you can create different cut angles. One way to
practice is take as many attempts as necessary to hit each target. Alternatively, you can score the drill by
giving yourself up to three attempts at each target. You get 3 points for success on the 1st attempt; otherwise,
you get 2 points for the 2nd or 1 for the 3rd. NV C.5 demonstrates the entire drill and suggests various
techniques and approaches that can help you improve your CB control.

                                                                   1         2         3       4

                                                                                                5

                                              CB in hand
                                               for each
                                                 shot
                                                                                                6

                        wagon wheel drill
                                                                                                7

                                                                   11        10        9       8

                                            Diagram 1 Wagon wheel drill

    With the first two target balls (1 and 2), you need to use a fairly full hit with a rolling CB, varying the cut
angle slightly for each ball. There is actually a system you can use to help decide where to place the CB to
achieve the desired CB direction. It is called the 3X system and states that for a fairly full hit (> ¾-ball hit), the

Billiards Digest                                                                                            June, 2012
CB will deflect at an angle three-times the cut angle (see my November, 2011 article for more information and
examples).

     For target balls 3 and 4, you can place the CB so the natural-angle direction heads directly to the target
for a rolling-CB shot. Remember the 30˚ rule? It states that a rolling CB deflects by very close to 30˚ for a
wide range of cut angles between a ¼-ball and ¾-ball hit. As illustrated in Diagram 2, if you point one finger
of the 30˚ rule peace sign in the desired target direction, the other finger will indicate the line along which you
want to place the CB. If you then pocket the OB with a rolling CB, the CB will head in the desired direction.
NV C.5 demonstrates this technique for both the 3 ball and 4 ball. Changing the CB placement changes the
natural angle direction for the shot.

                                                                                      3
                                                   slight             natural
                                                  pocket              angle
                                                  cheat
                                                                                               5

                                      30º rule                                  tangent line
                                     peace sign

                                                      A                                        7

                                                             3A
                                                                           trisect
                                                                          direction   9

                                 Diagram 2 Useful CB reference directions

     The 5-ball target is close to the tangent line, so stun (no top or bottom spin at the OB) can be used with
slight pocket cheat to the left (see Diagram 2). You can use whatever cut angle feels most comfortable in
terms of shot speed and the difficulty of pocketing the OB. An alternative to the stun shot is to shoot for
center pocket and allow the CB to pick up slight forward roll. For balls 6, 7, and 8, we can use the same cut
angle and just use an increasing amount of backspin for each ball. Diagram 2 illustrates the 7 ball shot, which
requires about half of maximum draw.

    For the remaining balls, we can use good-action draw and apply the trisect system to help us choose an
appropriate CB position (and cut angle) for each shot. The trisect system predicts that for good-action draw,
with cut angles less than about 40˚, the final CB direction will be 3-times the cut angle away from the original
CB direction (see the trisect system FAQ page on my website for more information and demonstrations).
Diagram 2 illustrates the trisect system applied to the 9 ball shot. Because the cut angle (A) trisects the total
angle to the 9 ball (3A), good-action draw will get the job done. NV C.5 illustrates how the system can also be
applied to the 10 ball and 11 ball shots, using different CB positions (cut angles) for each.

    The tangent line, natural angle, and trisect references are very useful for predicting and achieving CB
direction control. If you are weak in these areas or want additional information and demonstrations, check out
the position control FAQ page on my website.

     On the DVD, we show an alternative wagon wheel drill where you use a fixed CB position for each shot
(i.e., the cut angle is the same for each shot). This will limit the range of targets you can reach. For example,
with a ½-ball hit, the natural-angle and trisect directions would limit you to hitting only balls 3 through 9
(assuming you don’t attempt to use an elevated cue and masse effects).

Billiards Digest                                                                                         June, 2012
    As with all of the drills on VEPP, you should record your scores and track your improvement over time.
The “How to Use VEPP” document on the VEPP website contains some sheets to help with this. Scores are
useful for assessment and to provide a challenge. You can also use them to set goals for future
improvement.

     I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles featuring drills from the “Video Encyclopedia of
Pool Practice (VEPP).” Example clips from the second VEPP DVD can be viewed on the VEPP website or at
billiards.colostate.edu under NV C.5 through NV C.8. Next month, we’ll look at some additional CB control
drills from the second disc.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                      NV C.5 - Wagon wheel cue ball control drill, from VEPP II
                      NV C.6 - Target practice for position control, from VEPP II
normal video
                      NV C.7 - Center-table position-off-hanger drills, from VEPP II
                      NV C.8 - Line-of-balls position control drill, from VEPP II

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” and co-author of the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS)” and
“The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).”

Billiards Digest                                                                                        June, 2012
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vepp_part_iv_target_practice_card_trick.pdf
title: VEPP Part Iv Target Practice Card Trick
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEPP – Part IV: Target Practice Card Trick”                                ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

    This is fourth article in a series based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),” a five-
disc instructional DVD series I recently created with fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett. VEPP is an organized
and methodical training program and pool workout. It teaches you how to develop, assess, and track
progress of skills for all aspects of your game. An outline of the entire VEPP series and video excerpts from
each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/vepp. Last month, we looked at useful “wagon
wheel” drills from Disc II: “VEPP II – Position Control and English.” This month, we’ll look at position-control
target-practice drills and a useful supporting “card trick.”

     VEPP-II includes a variety of “target practice” drills where you attempt to leave the cue ball (CB) in a
designated position (i.e., on a “target”) after pocketing an object ball (OB). (“Target Pool” was originally
popularized by Kim Davenport who first offered a target product to help with drills.) When practicing “target
drills,” you should place the OB and target in random positions so you get a wide range of practice over time.
One way to ensure randomness is to use a deck of cards as shown in Diagram 1. An ace is placed in front of
the side pocket indicating the one position. Red cards of increasing number are placed along the long rail to
the right, and black cards are placed to the left. Diagram 1a shows alternating colors for cards across the
table, but color doesn’t matter here. As shown in Diagram 1b, all of the cards are placed at one-third-
                                                                                                    th
diamond increments, so the cards at the diamond positions are the 4, 7, and 10. The king, the 13 card, is
against the rail cushion. The layout is the same for the black cards to the left and for the cards across the
table.

                                         Diagram 1 Card grid layout

    To define the OB or target position, you draw two cards from a full deck (52 cards). The 1st card defines
the position across the table, and the 2nd card defines the position along the long rail. If the 2nd card is red,
you move to the right of the side pocket; otherwise, you move to the left. By matching the drawn card
numbers to the card positions on the table, you define the selected position. The first time you try this, you

Billiards Digest                                                                                        July, 2012
should lay out a set of cards on the table, as shown in Diagram 1, for practice. To prepare for the drill, draw
two cards to define the OB position. For example, if the 1st card is a 7 and the 2nd card is a red 4, place the
OB two diamonds from the long rail (on the centerline of the table) and at the first diamond to the right (see
Diagram 2). Now draw two cards for the target position. For example, if the 1st card is a 5 and the 2nd card is
a black 9, place the target 1/3 diamond past the 1st diamond line and to the left 1/3 short of the 2nd diamond at
10 (see Diagram 2). After a little practice, you won’t need the cards on the table to apply the system. Just
remember the diamond numbers are 4, 7, and 10, and other numbers are at diamond thirds in between. The
grid and example shown in Diagram 2 can be helpful as a reminder. NV C.6 demonstrates the system and
includes additional examples. A printable “target” is available on the resource page available on the VEPP
website.

                                                        10

                                                             OB (7, red 4)
                                                        7

                                                        4

                     target ( 5, black 9)

                          10          7      4           A         4         7      10

                               Diagram 2 Diamond grid with placement examples

     Now that the OB and targets are placed in random positions, you can do some target practice. We
present a wide range of target practice drills on the VEPP DVDs. Diagram 3 illustrates a simple example.
The goal is to pocket the OB and use stun, follow, or draw to send the CB straight to the target with no
cushion contact. For each of the six possible pockets, attempt each path possible with stun, follow, and/or
draw, placing the CB where you desire for each shot. When available, the easiest position play is usually
along the natural angle, where you can use the 30˚ rule “peace sign” to determine the necessary line for the
ball-in-hand CB position. Remember, you point one finger where you want the CB to head, and the other
finger indicates the necessary initial CB direction (see the 30˚ rule resource page in the FAQ section of my
website for demonstrations and more information). NV C.6 demonstrates how to do this for both shots “a”
and “b” in the diagram. Shot “c” in the diagram shows an example draw shot, where the trisect system can be
used to visualize the necessary ball-in-hand position (see “trisect system” under draw in the FAQ section of
my website for demonstrations and more information). NV C.6 demonstrates these and other possibilities for
all of the pockets, so check it out the next time you’re online.

Billiards Digest                                                                                        July, 2012
                                                                            a
                                      30º rule
                                     peace-sign

                                                                                       b
                                                         c

                                              Diagram 3 CB path examples

     I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles featuring drills from the “Video Encyclopedia of
Pool Practice (VEPP).” Example clips from the second VEPP DVD can be viewed on the VEPP website or at
billiards.colostate.edu under NV C.5 through NV C.8. Next month, we’ll look at some additional CB control
drills from the second disc.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                      NV C.5 - Wagon wheel cue ball control drill, from VEPP II
                      NV C.6 - Target practice for position control, from VEPP II
normal video
                      NV C.7 - Center-table position-off-hanger drills, from VEPP II
                      NV C.8 - Line-of-balls position control drill, from VEPP II

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” and co-author of the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS)” and
“The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).”

Billiards Digest                                                                                         July, 2012
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vepp_part_ix_safety_drills.pdf
title: VEPP Part Ix Safety Drills
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEPP – Part IX: Safety Drills”                                             ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

    This is the ninth article in a series based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),” a five-
disc instructional-DVD collection I recently created with fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett. VEPP is an
organized and methodical training program and pool workout. It teaches you how to develop, assess, and
track progress of skills for all facets of your game. An outline of the entire VEPP series along with video
excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/vepp. In the last few months, we’ve
looked at some useful position play and pattern drills from Disc III: “VEPP III – Patterns and Safety Play.”
                                                                     rd
This month, we’ll look at some useful safety drills, also from the 3 DVD, to help you develop and improve
your defensive play.

     Diagram 1 shows a safety drill for practicing and improving your skills at hiding the cue ball (CB) behind a
blocker ball. The goal is to snooker the 1 ball from the CB by hiding behind the 2. The 1 ball starts one
diamond off each rail and the 2 ball is a couple of inches off the cushion across from the 1. On each attempt,
take CB in hand on or above the line through the side pockets. Obviously, a good position for the CB is one
that allows a natural angle deflection off the 1 ball in the desired direction. The 30˚ rule peace sign (see the
30˚ rule resource page in the FAQ section of my website for more info) can be helpful in finding the necessary
CB position. The best hiding place for the CB is between the 2 ball and the side cushion, as shown in the
diagram. With a natural-angle shot, the only thing you need to control is speed, and there is a fairly wide
margin for error for shot success. If you can leave the CB and 1 ball as shown in the diagram, you’ve played
an extremely effective safety. After succeeding with the first ball position in multiple attempts, advance the 1
ball along the diagonal line between the corner and side. Also shift the 2 ball up table with the 1 ball as
shown in the diagram, moving the balls up table in half-diamond increments.

                                                                   advance the 1 ball
                                                                  and 2 ball as shown
                          goal: hide the CB
                           from the 1 ball
                          behind the 2 ball
                                                                                   30º rule
                                                                                  peace sign

                                      ball in hand on                              1
                                    the side-pocket line

                                                                                   2

                                    Diagram 1 Angled safety drill setup

    Diagram 2 shows two possible shots for the next ball position. With the shot from C-1 (see the black
paths), the CB is hidden so well, if almost doesn’t matter where you leave the 1-ball. However, if the speed or

Billiards Digest                                                                                   December, 2012
angle is off a little, and you don’t hide the CB as well, you might leave a shot for your opponent on the 1 ball in
the side pocket. That could spell doom for the game (and maybe even the match and tournament!). A better
option might be to send the 1-ball farther up table, while still trying to hide the CB (see the shot from C-2,
shown in red). This can help provide a larger margin for error in hiding behind the 2.

                                                    C-2                         1
                                                    C-1

                                                                                2

                                 Diagram 2 Two options at the 2nd position

     Diagram 3 shows two alternative paths you can try as the balls are advanced farther up table. The first
(from C-1, shown in black) uses a two-cushion path to hide the CB while sending the 1-ball close to the side
rail, making it easier to hide behind the 2 ball. Another option (from C-2, shown in red) is to send the CB
directly behind the 2 with slight follow, while sending the 1 ball up table toward the center of the head rail.
This shot can be difficult to control, due to the precise amount of forward roll required, but this could be a
good choice in some game situations, where you attempt to both hide the CB and create distance for a two-
way safety. Even if you don’t hide the CB, you won’t leave a good shot on the 1 ball. Both of the options in
Diagram 3 require good speed control because the CB is not coming into the line of the hiding direction
behind the 2.

                                                    C-2                    1

                                                    C-1

                                                                           2

                                 Diagram 3 Two options at the 3rd position

Billiards Digest                                                                                    December, 2012
     At each ball position in the drill, you should try as many paths as possible to help you develop a feel for
different speeds, English options, and angles that might be required in various game situations. In the
process, you can determine what approaches seem to work best for you. See NV C.11 for more examples
and advice.

     Diagram 4 shows another safety drill and challenge. It helps give you practice with different position
routes to hide the CB or object ball (OB) behind an obstacle ball or cluster. As with the target drills presented
in my July ‘12 article, start by choosing the OB and cluster target positions randomly (e.g., using the “card
trick” described in the article). The target can be printed and cut out from the template provided on the VEPP
website (under “VEPP Online Resources”). Fill the target with 7 balls as shown in the diagram. In this drill,
starting with ball in hand for each shot, your goal is to think of and execute as many different shots as
possible to hide either the CB or OB behind the cluster. You’re not allowed to touch the balls in the cluster.
Give yourself three attempts at each shot and award yourself a point if you hide the CB from the OB for the
chosen shot. Obviously, the goal is to get as high a score as possible. The drill rewards and helps you
develop both creativity and shot execution skills. The diagram shows a few shot options, and NV C.12
demonstrates many others. The shot from C-1 (in black) shows a fairly easy natural-angle path. The shot
from C-2 (in red) is also fairly easy, sending the OB behind the cluster with a stop shot. In some game
situations, even with ball in hand, depending on other balls that might be on the table, a path like the one
shown from C-3 (in blue) might be an appropriate choice. Again, be creative and find as many shot options
as you can. For more examples and advice, see NV C.12.

                                                                        obstacle ball
                                                                          cluster

                                                                                2
                                                                              7   3
                                                                                9
                                                                              6   4
                                                                                5

                                      C-1

                                C-2     1

                                            C-2

                                             Diagram 4 Target safety drill

    I hope you are enjoying and benefitting from my series of articles featuring drills from the “Video
Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).” Example clips from the third DVD can be viewed on the VEPP
website or at billiards.colostate.edu under NV C.9 through NV C.12. Next month, we’ll look at some useful
kick drills from the 4th DVD: “VEPP IV – Banks, Kicks, and Advanced Shots.”

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV C.9 - 9-ball pattern drills, from VEPP III
                   NV C.10 - 8-ball pattern drills, from VEPP III
normal video
                   NV C.11 - Angled-hide safety drill, from VEPP III
                   NV C.12 - Hide-behind-target safety drill, from VEPP III

Billiards Digest                                                                                   December, 2012
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” and co-author of the DVD Series: “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS)” and
“Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).”

Billiards Digest                                                                               December, 2012
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vepp_part_v_hanger_table_center_drills.pdf
title: VEPP Part V Hanger Table Center Drills
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEPP – Part V: Hanger Table-Center Drills”                                    ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

    This is the fifth article in a series based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),” a five-
disc instructional DVD series I recently created with fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett. VEPP is an organized
and methodical training program and pool workout. It teaches you how to develop, assess, and track
progress of skills for all aspects of your game. An outline of the entire VEPP series along with video excerpts
from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/vepp. Last month, we looked at useful
position-control target-practice drills from Disc II: “VEPP II – Position Control and English.” This month, we’ll
look at center-of-table drills, also from the second DVD.

    Getting position in the center of the table is a critically important skill in pool. From the center of the table,
you often have the most options for follow-on shots since many shots can be pocketed from the center of the
table. Position routes through the center of the table are also important because they are useful in getting
around the table and have the added benefit of being scratch-free. NV B.74 shows examples of this and
demonstrates the useful 45˚ rule that states: when the CB rolls into a short rail at close to a 45˚ angle, it will
head off two rails fairly close to the center of the table.

    NV C.7 demonstrates several drills to help you develop your skills for getting the CB to the center of the
table. Diagram 1 illustrates one of the drills, where the goal is to get to the center of the table off a side-
pocket hanger shot. Pocket hangers come up fairly often in game situations, and they are often useful to help
you achieve good position for the next shot. With hangers, you can focus more on CB position and less on
pocketing the ball, since the pocket can often be “cheated” quite a bit to create various angles. It is important
to have a good feel for the angle the CB comes off the rail for different hits on the hanger. Useful benchmark
rules-of-thumb for this can be found in shots 308-317 on Disc II of the Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots
(VEPS).

                                                            1
                                                                 C-3

                                                                 C-2
                                                      C-1

                         Diagram 1 Side Pocket Hanger Table-Center Position Drill

Billiards Digest                                                                                          August, 2012
    For the drill in Diagram 1, the goal is to find as many routes to the table-center target as possible. A
printable “target” is available on the resource page available on the VEPP website. You get CB in hand for
each attempt. To score the drill, award yourself a point for each unique and successful path, with the CB
ending up inside the target. Give yourself up to three attempts at each path. Shoot from only one side of the
table. You are not allowed credit for the symmetric paths on the other side of the table … that would be
cheating (although, it is good practice to hit the shots from both sides of the table to make sure you don’t favor
one side over the other). NV C.7 demonstrates many example paths.

    In Diagram 1, two possible paths are shown from CB position C-1. The first (red) is a straight-back draw
shot. If you have good draw control, this is a good option. The second (blue) is a natural-angle three-cushion
path with running English. The shot from C-2 (black) is a natural-angle two-cushion path with running
English. The shot from C-3 (purple) is a natural-angle path off one cushion. In general, natural-angle rolling-
CB paths are the most reliable because the only thing you need to control is speed (and the amount of
sidespin for shots with English). Try to think of and attempt as many paths as you can before watching the
video.

     Diagram 2 illustrates a similar drill, this time shooting at a hanger in a corner pocket. Again, the goal is to
pocket the hanger and send the CB as close to the center-table target as possible (ideally, inside the target).
Three paths are shown from CB position C-1. The first (black) is a draw shot at a slight angle straight back to
the target. The second (purple) is a thin-hit rolling path off one cushion. The third (blue) is a stun shot with
slight running English off four cushions, which requires good control of speed, angle, and spin. All of these
shots require a fairly accurate hit (cut angle). The shot from C-2 (red) is a more-natural two-cushion path with
running English. The one-cushion shot from C-3 (orange) is probably the most natural for most people. The
rolling-CB natural angle is fairly consistent over a range of cuts and the running English helps get the CB to
the table center easily with a soft shot. Again, NV C.7 includes these and additional examples.

    The next time you practice, try all of the position routes illustrated above and demonstrated in the video,
and try to think of others. As with all of the drills on VEPP, you should record your scores and track your
improvement over time. The “How to Use VEPP” document on the VEPP website contains some sheets to
help with this. Scores are useful for assessment and to provide a challenge. You can also use them to set
goals for future improvement.

                                                                                  C-2        2
                                                                            C-1

                                                                                            C-3

                       Diagram 2 Corner Pocket Hanger Table-Center Position Drill

   I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles featuring drills from the “Video Encyclopedia of
Pool Practice (VEPP).” Example clips from the second VEPP DVD can be viewed on the VEPP website or at

Billiards Digest                                                                                        August, 2012
billiards.colostate.edu under NV C.5 through NV C.8. Next month, we’ll look at some additional CB control
drills from the second disc.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                      NV B.74 - Center-of-table position and routes, with the 45˚ rule, from VEPS II
                      NV C.5 - Wagon wheel cue ball control drill, from VEPP II
                      NV C.6 - Target practice for position control, from VEPP II
normal video          NV C.7 - Center-table position-off-hanger drills, from VEPP II
                      NV C.8 - Line-of-balls position control drill, from VEPP II

PS:
              I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” and co-author of the DVD Series: “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS)” and
“Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).”

Billiards Digest                                                                                       August, 2012
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vepp_part_vi_line_of_balls_drill.pdf
title: VEPP Part Vi Line Of Balls Drill
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEPP – Part VI: Line-of-Balls Drill”                                                    ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

    This is the sixth article in a series based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),” a five-
disc instructional-DVD series I recently created with fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett. VEPP is an organized
and methodical training program and pool workout. It teaches you how to develop, assess, and track
progress of skills for all facets of your game. An outline of the entire VEPP series along with video excerpts
from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/vepp. Last month, we looked at useful
center-of-table drills from Disc II: “VEPP II – Position Control and English.” This month, we’ll look at another
type of position control drill, also from the second DVD.

     Diagram 1 shows the set-up for a line-of-balls drill useful to practice and develop your position play skills.
Nine balls (1 through 9) are lined up about a ball apart along the centerline of the table starting a ball off the
end cushion. Starting with cue ball (CB) in hand, the goal is to pocket as many balls as you can in rotation
(i.e., in numerical order) in any pockets without disturbing any of the remaining balls. There are many position
play options for the first ball, but it is easy to start with basic draw (see the yellow path). The goal is to leave a
slight angle on the 2 ball, which leads to a similar position play for the 3-ball (see the blue path). If you don’t
leave enough angle on a ball, you can draw straight back off the cushion for good position on the next ball as
shown with the 3-ball shot (see the red path). With position above the line to the pocket, as with the 4 ball, a
rolling-CB, natural angle path off the end rail, to the other side of the line of balls, is a fairly easy-to-control
option. Several position options for the 5-ball (A through D) are shown in the diagram. You could target A to
shoot the 6 in the upper side pocket. Alternatively, you could go longer to C, where you could draw back for
the 6, or D, where you have decent draw or follow options (albeit, with a longer shot). You definitely want to
avoid position B because it would require a bank shot on the 5 to avoid contact with the 6. As you progress
through the line of balls, the drill gets easier because the side pockets begin to offer easy shot and position
options, as demonstrated in NV C.8.

                                line-of-balls
                                                                 9   8       7   6       5   4   3   2   1
                                position drill

                                                                                             A
                                                                                     B
                                                                         C
                                                             D

                                      Diagram 1 Line-of-balls position drill

Billiards Digest                                                                                             September, 2012
      Obviously, you want to avoid bank shots like the plague if you want to be consistently successful with the
drill (and with your position play in game situations). When playing for position to pocket one of the drill balls
in a corner pocket, you need to make sure you end up above the line through the ball to the pocket. This will
allow you to pocket the ball without bumping into the next ball, without needing to resort to a bank. Diagram
2 illustrates several ways to accomplish this. From position A, a simple draw shot is a good option (see the
black path). If the shot is straight in (from B), a good option is drawing straight back off the side cushion (see
the yellow path). If the CB were at C, a good option would be to follow forward with running English off two
cushions (see the light blue path). If you are above the ball, as in position D, a good choice is to follow for a
natural-angle path to the other side of the balls (see the purple path). If you are up even higher, at E, you can
draw off two cushions to help kill the speed for good position (see the red path). A touch of outside English
helps create the angle needed. And if the CB were even higher, at F, an option is to go up and down the
table (see the dark blue path); although, this is a tough shot and much more difficult to control, so it is best to
not leave such a steep angle if you can avoid it. These and other options are demonstrated in NV C.8.

                                                                    F             D CB A
                                                                            E

                                                                                    3   2

                     Diagram 2 Path options for position from the 2 ball to the 3 ball

     The next time you practice, try all of the position routes illustrated above and demonstrated in the video,
try to think of others, and see how well you can do with the drill. As with all of the drills on VEPP, you should
record your scores and track your improvement over time. The “How to Use VEPP” document on the VEPP
website contains some sheets to help with this. Scores are useful for assessment and to provide a challenge.
You can also use them to set goals for future improvement.

     I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles featuring drills from the “Video Encyclopedia of
Pool Practice (VEPP).” Example clips from the second VEPP DVD can be viewed on the VEPP website or at
billiards.colostate.edu under NV C.5 through NV C.8. Next month, we’ll start looking at useful pattern and
safety drills from the third disc.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                                    September, 2012
                      NV B.74 - Center-of-table position and routes, with the 45 ˚ rule, from VEPS II
                      NV C.5 - Wagon wheel cue ball control drill, from VEPP II
                      NV C.6 - Target practice for position control, from VEPP II
normal video          NV C.7 - Center-table position-off-hanger drills, from VEPP II
                      NV C.8 - Line-of-balls position control drill, from VEPP II

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” and co-author of the DVD Series: “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS)” and
“Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).”

Billiards Digest                                                                                        September, 2012
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vepp_part_vii_9_ball_pattern_drills.pdf
title: VEPP Part Vii 9 Ball Pattern Drills
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEPP – Part VII: 9-Ball Pattern Drills”                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

      This is the seventh article in a series based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),” a
five-disc instructional-DVD collection I recently created with fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett. VEPP is an
organized and methodical training program and pool workout. It teaches you how to develop, assess, and
track progress of skills for all facets of your game. An outline of the entire VEPP series along with video
excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/vepp. In the last few months, we’ve
looked at useful position control drills from Disc II. This month, we look at some 9-ball pattern drills from Disc
III: “VEPP III – Patterns and Safety Play.”

    You can work on cut, stop, follow, draw, wagon wheel, and target drills all day long and become fairly
proficient with them with practice over time. However, if you can’t apply the skills appropriately in game
situations, you won’t be a good player … you’ll just be good at drills. To help people assess and develop their
game-playing skills, Bob and I included a collection of 9-ball and 8-ball pattern drills that help test how well
you apply skills in typical game situations. There are existing rating drills that have been around a while to
help test offensive skills (e.g., Hopkins Q Skills and FARGO), and they are included on VEPP, but these drills
begin with a break, which gives a random spread of balls. Because of this, the difficulty level of running the
balls can vary wildly from one rack to the next. To provide a more uniform assessment, Bob and I decided to
use the fixed-pattern approach.

     VEPP presents 12 different 9-ball patterns. They are organized into 3 levels with 4 layouts per level.
Each level contains 4 layouts of 5 shots worth 1 point each. If you attempt each layout 5 times, that gives a
maximum score of 100 … a nice round number for an “exam.” The difficulty level increases from one layout
to the next and from each level to the next. This helps an instructor or player determine a level suitable for
practice. Diagrams for all of the layouts can be found in Section 4 of the 9-ball clinic handout available on the
VEPP website. The handout also contains a scoring sheet one can use to document results and monitor
improvement over time.

     Diagram 1 shows the first layout in the first level (labeled “101A” in the handout). All ball positions in all
layouts are either at diamond or half-diamond intersection points or an inch off or frozen to the cushion across
from a diamond or pocket point. With each layout, you start with ball in hand and attempt to run the table in
rotation. Part of the challenge of each layout is to decide where to place the cue ball (CB) to make the runout
as easy as possible. The diagram shows a good starting position for this layout, close to the center of the
table. This leads to a near stop-stop-stop-stop roadmap. In the Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),
we call this a “Tom Cruise runout” because most of the shot sequences actually shot by Tom Cruise in the
movie “The Color of Money” were set up to be very natural and easy to where even an actor with minimal pool
skills could run out. Although, Mr. Cruise does deserve a little credit for being skilled enough to at least be
somewhat convincing as a pool player on the big screen. Tom also created a lasting legacy with his
showboating karate-style dance moves that have inspired many people to make fools of themselves in pool
halls ever since, especially when "Werewolves of London" is playing on the jukebox. Thank you Mr. Cruise …
thanks al lot! Sorry, I digress. Let’s get back to some 9-ball layouts.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      October, 2012
                                                         5                                    8

                                                         6                                    9

                                                                                      7

                                  Diagram 1 9-ball pattern (level 1, layout 1)

    Diagram 2 shows the first layout in the third level (labeled “103A” in the handout). This layout has the
added requirement and challenge that the CB may not touch a cushion. This forces us to use stun and draw
while leaving appropriate angles on shots. The diagram shows a suggested runout pattern. The challenge is
to use the correct speed on the 6-ball shot to not leave enough but not too much angle on the 7 to get good
position on the 8 without hitting a cushion. You also need to come off the 8 and get as straight as possible on
the 9 to avoid hitting a cushion on the last shot.

                                                         7

                        6

                        5   9

                                                             8

                                  Diagram 2 9-ball pattern (level 3, layout 1)

     Diagram 3 shows the last layout from the final level (labeled “103D” in the handout). An added
requirement for this drill is to use three-cushion position routes off both the 6 and 8 to get position on the 7
and 9. A good starting position is nearly straight on the 5 to leave a natural three cushion path off the 6. Do
you remember the 45˚ rule from VEPS-II? As demonstrated in NV B.74, if the CB rolls into the end cushion at
close to a 45˚ angle, the CB will track very close through the center of the table. Here, we want to use a
slightly shallower angle off the 6 into the end rail to go behind the 8 and slightly short of the table center giving
a perfect line into the 7-ball shot. Running English helps maintain CB speed off the first two cushions and

Billiards Digest                                                                                        October, 2012
helps the CB take a natural and consistent path. The three-cushion paths in this runout are very common in
9-ball position play, so it is important to practice them.

                         9                                   5                          6

                         7                                                              8

                                       Diagram 3 9-ball pattern (level 3, layout 4)

    Would you have approached these layouts any differently? Try them out, along with the others in the
handout to see how you do on the “exam.” Demonstrations of the layouts in this article can be viewed in NV
C.9, and VEPP-III demonstrates all 12 of them. As with all of the drills on VEPP, you should record your
scores and track your improvement over time. The “How to Use VEPP” document on the VEPP website
contains some sheets to help with this. Scores are useful for both assessment and to provide a challenge.
You can also use them to set goals for future improvement.

    I hope you are enjoying and benefitting from my series of articles featuring drills from the “Video
Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).” Example clips from the third DVD can be viewed on the VEPP
website or at billiards.colostate.edu under NV C.9 through NV C.12. Next month, we’ll look at a selection of
the 8-ball pattern drills.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                      NV B.74 - Center-of-table position and routes, with the 45˚ rule, from VEPS II
                      NV C.9 - 9-ball pattern drills, from VEPP III
                      NV C.10 - 8-ball pattern drills, from VEPP III
normal video          NV C.11 - Angled-hide safety drill, from VEPP III
                      NV C.12 - Hide-behind-target safety drill, from VEPP III

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” and co-author of the DVD Series: “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS)” and
“Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).”

Billiards Digest                                                                                       October, 2012
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vepp_part_viii_8_ball_pattern_drills.pdf
title: VEPP Part Viii 8 Ball Pattern Drills
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEPP – Part VIII: 8-Ball Pattern Drills”                                    ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the eighth article in a series based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),” a
five-disc instructional-DVD collection I recently created with fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett. VEPP is an
organized and methodical training program and pool workout. It teaches you how to develop, assess, and
track progress of skills for all facets of your game. An outline of the entire VEPP series along with video
excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/vepp. Last month, we looked at
some useful 9-ball pattern drills from Disc III: “VEPP III – Patterns and Safety Play.” This month, we look at
                                            rd
some 8-ball pattern drills, also from the 3 DVD.

    You can work on cut, stop, follow, draw, wagon wheel, and target drills all day long and become fairly
proficient with them with practice over time. However, if you can’t apply the skills appropriately in game
situations, you won’t be a good player … you’ll just be good at drills. To help people assess and develop their
game-playing skills, Bob and I included a collection of 9-ball and 8-ball pattern drills that help test how well
you apply skills in typical game situations. There are existing rating drills that have been around a while to
help test offensive skills (e.g., Hopkins Q Skills and FARGO), and they are included on VEPP, but these drills
begin with a break, which gives a random spread of balls. Because of this, the difficulty level of running the
balls can vary wildly from one rack to the next. To provide a more uniform assessment, Bob and I decided to
use the fixed-pattern approach.

     VEPP presents 12 different 8-ball patterns. They are organized into 3 levels with 4 layouts per level.
Each layout includes 3 stripes and the 8 ball. Each stripe is worth 1 point and the 8 ball is worth 2, for a total
of 5. If you attempt each layout in a level 5 times, that gives a maximum score of 100 … a nice round number
for an “exam.” The difficulty level increases from one layout to the next and from each level to the next. This
helps an instructor or player determine a level suitable for practice. As with the 9-ball drills from last month,
diagrams for all layouts can be found on the VEPP website (in the “8-ball Clinic handout”). The handout also
contains a scoring sheet one can use to document results and monitor improvement over time.

     Diagram 1 shows the first layout in the first level (labeled “8-1A” in the handout). All ball positions in all
layouts are either at diamond or half-diamond intersection points or an inch off or frozen to the cushion across
from a diamond or pocket point. With each layout, you start with ball in hand and attempt to run out the
stripes and the 8. Part of the challenge of each layout is to decide where to place the cue ball to make the
runout as easy as possible. The diagram shows a good starting position for this layout, close to the center of
the table. After using stop or slight draw on the 11- and 12-ball shots, we are left with perfect shape on the 13
to roll forward off the end rail for an easy shot at the 8.

Billiards Digest                                                                                    November, 2012
                                                         11                           8

                                                         12                           13

                                 Diagram 1 8-ball pattern – level 1, layout 1

    Diagram 2 shows the second layout in the third level (labeled “8-3B” in the handout). Here, there are
also some solids on the table serving as obstacles to our runout. With this layout, even though the 11 and 12
balls are close to the 8, they are not good choices for the key ball because it is difficult to get position, with a
good angle, coming down table off the 11. A better approach is to clear the 11 and 12 first, using the 13 as
the key ball for the 8. A follow shot on the 12 leaves perfect position on the 13, where outside draw is used to
head into the line of the 8 while staying well clear of the obstacle solids.

                                                                                      8

                                                                                             11

                                    5 4                                     1 2
                                                                                  3

                                                                                             12

                            13

                                  Diagram 2 8-ball pattern –level 3, layout 2

    Diagram 3 shows the last layout from the final level (labeled “8-3D” in the handout). Here, the ball
closest to the 8 (the 13) is the best key ball. A good starting point is shown with an angle on the 11 to leave
enough angle on the 12 to go three cushions to the 13. You just need to be careful to stay above the 1 ball
when getting position on the 12. The three-cushion position route from the 12 to the 13, with running follow, is
a fairly natural and common position route through the center of the table, especially in 9-ball (as we saw last
month). As long as you don’t leave the 13-ball shot straight in, it is easy to get position on the 8 with a follow
shot.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     November, 2012
                                                                                 4        8
                                                                                 5

                         12                                                                   13

                                 1                                               2   3

                          11

                                       Diagram 3 8-ball pattern –level 3, layout 4

    Would you have approached these layouts any differently? Try them out, along with the others in the
handout to see how you do on the “exam.” Demonstrations of the layouts in this article can be viewed in NV
C.10, and VEPP-III demonstrates all 12 of them. As with all of the drills on VEPP, you should record your
scores and track your improvement over time. The “How to Use VEPP” document on the VEPP website
contains some sheets to help with this. Scores are useful for both assessment and to provide a challenge.
You can also use them to set goals for future improvement.

    I hope you are enjoying and benefitting from my series of articles featuring drills from the “Video
Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).” Example clips from the third DVD can be viewed on the VEPP
website or at billiards.colostate.edu under NV C.9 through NV C.12. Next month, we’ll look at some useful
safety drills to help you develop and improve your defensive game.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                      NV C.9 - 9-ball pattern drills, from VEPP III
                      NV C.10 - 8-ball pattern drills, from VEPP III
normal video
                      NV C.11 - Angled-hide safety drill, from VEPP III
                      NV C.12 - Hide-behind-target safety drill, from VEPP III

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” and co-author of the DVD Series: “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS)” and
“Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).”

Billiards Digest                                                                                    November, 2012
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vepp_part_x_shallow_one_rail_kicks.pdf
title: VEPP Part X Shallow One Rail Kicks
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEPP – Part X: Shallow One-rail Kicks”                                     ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the tenth article in a series based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),” a
five-disc instructional-DVD collection I recently created with fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett. VEPP is an
organized and methodical training program and pool workout. It teaches you how to develop, assess, and
track progress of skills for all facets of your game. An outline of the entire VEPP series along with video
excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/vepp. In the last few months, we’ve
looked at position play and safety drills from Disc III: “VEPP III – Patterns and Safety Play.” Over the next few
months, we’ll look at some aiming systems and drills from Disc IV: “VEPP IV- Banks, Kicks, and Advanced
Shots.”

    Diagram 1 shows one of the most useful and simple systems available for aiming one-rail kick shots.
This system works well for slow-rolling kicks where the object ball (OB) is fairly close to a rail. The cue ball
(CB) location isn’t as important as long as it isn’t coming into the rail at too steep of an angle (e.g., greater
than about 45˚). The first step in aiming the kick is to use your cue or hand to measure the distance from the
desired OB contact point (CP) to the nose of the cushion (see the orange double arrow on the left in the
diagram). If you want to see a demonstration, check out videos NV B.83 and NV C.13 on my website. The
next step is to find the mirror image of the CP relative to the nose of the cushion by doubling the measured
distance, which can easily be accomplished by shifting your cue or hand from the CP to the cushion nose.
With the CB aimed directly at this mirrored point, the system predicts that you should pocket the ball. This
same aim point will work for a wide range of CB positions, as illustrated in the diagram. It is very important
that the CB be rolling with slow speed. It is also important that the CB not have any English, intentional or
otherwise, so be sure to contact the CB along its vertical centerline. This is particularly important with steeper
angles relative to the rail, where English has a larger effect on the CB rebound angle.

     The system works best when the OB is a ball off the cushion, as shown in Diagram 1. The system is still
useful when the OB is closer or farther from the rail, but the aim point will need to be adjusted slightly for
different OB distances. Also, at very shallow CB angles into the rail (e.g., from CB position C-2), you need to
aim a little farther up the rail or use a little more speed; otherwise, the CB won’t rebound off the cushion
enough causing you to undercut the shot.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      January, 2013
                                             C-3        C-1    C-2

                                              desired
                                              contact
                                               point
                                                               9

                                                   mirrored
                                                   aim point

                   Diagram 1 Shallow-angle, rolling CB, contact-point mirror kick system

    Diagram 2 shows how to adjust when the OB is closer to the cushion. In this example, the OB is only a
half ball away. With the OB close to the cushion, the CB tends to not roll and curve forward enough. This
would cause you to overcut the shot if you used the ideal mirrored aim point. To compensate, you need to
move the mirrored aim point down the rail a little, as shown in the diagram. The amount you need to shift
depends on conditions and shot speed. When the CB is close to the rail (e.g., in position C-1), creating a
shallow angle, you don’t need to adjust the aim point as much and the aim will be a little closer to the ideal
mirrored point. You could also just use more speed instead, with the same adjusted aim point as other shots.
The only way to develop a feel for how much to adjust with different conditions and for different speeds is to
practice. We have a collection of drills on VEPP to help with this. Some of them are demonstrated in NV
C.13.

                                             C-2               C-1

                                                                   9

                                                   adjusted
                                                   aim point

        Diagram 2 Adjusting the aim down rail when the OB is closer than one ball to the cushion

    Diagram 3 shows how to adjust when the OB is farther than one ball from the cushion. In this example,
the OB is a ball and a half away. With the OB farther from the cushion, the CB tends to roll forward a little too
soon. This would cause you to undercut the OB if you used the ideal mirrored aim point. To compensate,

Billiards Digest                                                                                     January, 2013
you need to adjust the mirrored aim point up the rail a little. Again, the amount you need to shift depends on
conditions and shot speed. As before, you need to adjust differently when the CB is close to the rail at a
shallow angle (e.g., at CB position C-1). In this case, the adjusted aim point needs to be even farther from
the ideal mirrored point, or you can just use more speed. You will also find that you need to adjust differently
as the incoming CB angle gets steep (e.g., at CB position C-2). At steeper angles, the aim needs to be a little
closer to the mirrored point than with modest CB angles.

                                              C-2               C-1

                                                                9

                                                    adjusted
                                                    aim point

         Diagram 3 Adjusting the aim up rail when the OB is farther than one ball from the cushion

     It is important to remember that all shots in this article require a rolling CB at fairly slow speed. The
speed needs to be a little faster with the shallow-angle shots (if using the same aim point), but faster speeds
will make the CB go short of the target causing you to overcut the OB.

    To be able to judge how much you need to adjust for conditions, shot speed, and CB angle, you need to
practice. That’s why we have a collection of drills on VEPP covering this and other kick and bank shot aiming
systems. The systems are not much use if you don’t practice with them and develop the “feel” necessary to
apply them successfully.

     I hope you are enjoying and benefitting from my series of articles featuring drills from the “Video
Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).” Example clips from Disc IV can be viewed on the VEPP website or at
billiards.colostate.edu under NV C.13 through NV C.16. Next month, we’ll look at some useful bank shot
drills, also from the 4th DVD.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV B.83 – Shallow-angle contact-point-mirror-image kick-shot aiming system, from
                   VEPS IV
                   NV C.13 – Shallow-angle one-rail kick drills, from VEPP IV
normal video
                   NV C.14 – Bank shot cut-angle-effects drills, from VEPP IV
                   NV C.15 – Bank-to-all-pockets challenge drill, from VEPP IV
                   NV C.16 – Jump shot drills, from VEPP IV

Billiards Digest                                                                                      January, 2013
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
          familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
          please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” and co-author of the DVD Series: “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS)” and
“Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).”

Billiards Digest                                                                                January, 2013
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vepp_part_xi_bank_shots.pdf
title: VEPP Part Xi Bank Shots
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEPP – Part XI: Bank Shots”                                                 ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the eleventh article in a series based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),” a
five-disc instructional-DVD collection I recently created with fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett. VEPP is an
organized and methodical training program and pool workout. It teaches you how to develop, assess, and
track progress of skills for all facets of your game. An outline of the entire VEPP series along with video
excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/vepp. Last month, we looked at a
useful kick shot aiming system from Disc IV: “VEPP IV- Banks, Kicks, and Advanced Shots.” This month,
we’ll look at some bank shot drills and effects.

     There are many different “systems” commonly used to help aim kick and bank shots. If you want to learn
about them and see video demonstrations, visit the “bank and kick shot aiming system” resource page in the
FAQ section of my website. Regardless of what system you might use, or even if you just aim by “feel,” you
need to be able to make adjustments as the cut angle of a bank changes. The drill illustrated in Diagram 1 is
designed to help one develop a feel for all of the important effects. Position the object ball (OB) one diamond
above and out from the side pocket, and start with the cue ball (CB) on the table centerline two balls down
from the OB (at position C-1). With this bank shot, the CB imparts counterclockwise (right) spin on the OB
causing it to rebound short of what might be predicted by a typical bank-shot aiming system. Therefore, you
need the cut the OB more than the system might predict. For the line of aim shown in Diagram 1, many
bank-shot aiming systems (e.g., equal-angle mirroring) would predict the OB would rebound beyond the
pocket, but the induced spin shortens the bank quite a bit. Practice this first shot until you develop a solid feel
for how much you need to adjust your aim to compensate for the induced spin.

                                                                     equal-angle
                                                                      mirror-aim
                                                                       direction

                                           C-4 C-2
                                                              shortened
                                         C-5 C-3   C-1
                                                               rebound

                                               9

                                                            cut-induced
                                                                spin

                                 Diagram 1 Bank shot cut-angle effects drill

    After succeeding with the CB position C-1, move the CB up table one ball width (to position C-2) and try
again. Then continue to advance up table. As the cut angle decreases from positions C-1 to C-4, there will
be less cut-induced spin, and you won’t need to adjust your aim as much. When the CB is lined up straight

Billiards Digest                                                                                      February, 2013
along the ideal aim for the bank shot (e.g., in position C-4), you won’t need to adjust at all because with no cut
angle, there will be no cut-induced spin. As you advance the CB farther up table (positions C-5 and above),
the CB will be cutting across the OB path, creating an inside cut, and clockwise (left) spin will be induced on
the OB. This will cause the OB to bank long of the direction predicted by most systems. To adjust, you will
need to aim for a thinner hit on the OB. Induced spin is greatest at close to a half-ball hit (30˚ cut angle).
With smaller cut angles, there will be less induced spin. There is also less spin for cuts much thinner than a
half-ball hit. Speed also reduces the amount of induced spin at the larger cut angles, which will require less
aiming adjustment. For more information on and demonstrations of these effects, see the “spin transfer”
resource page in the FAQ section of my website. Again, work with the drill enough to develop a feel for the
induced-spin and speed effects so you will be able to adjust appropriately in different game situations.

     As demonstrated in video NV C.14, you will need to be able to judge when a double kiss is possible and
use speed and/or english to help avoid it. The “double kiss detection and avoidance” section in the “bank and
kick shot” resource page describes and demonstrates some useful systems for dealing with potential double
kisses. NV C.14, in addition to showing the drill above, also describes and demonstrates another drill where
you bank cross corner instead of cross side. With cross-corner banks, there are two zones where double
kisses are possible and must be addressed. The first zone is where the bank is fairly straight, with a slight cut
on the inside (as with the cross-side banks). The second zone occurs when cutting across the line of the shot
and the double kiss is likely after the CB rebounds off the end rail. Please refer to the video to see how to
detect and avoid these situations. Then practice both drills. The only way to get better at bank shots is to
practice them until you develop reliable intuition for how much aim, speed, and spin adjustments are required
in different situations.

      Diagram 2 and Diagram 3 show a fun and challenging bank drill made famous by Eddie Taylor, a bank-
pool legend. The goal is to bank the OB into each of the six pockets with ball in hand for each shot. The OB
is frozen to the side cushion at the 2nd diamond. The first three shots are simple 1-cushion banks. The
remaining three require banks off two or more cushions, and they are more difficult. One purpose for this drill
is to give you practice learning how to make adjustments based on what you see since you typically will not
make these shots on the first attempts. These adjustments will help you develop and improve your ability to
judge different bank effects at different angles, spins, and speeds. (FYI, I have a summary and
demonstrations of all important kick and bank effects in the “effects and factors to consider” section on the
“bank and kick shot” resource page.) The drill also helps you learn to detect and avoid possible double kisses
when banking a ball frozen to cushion. The diagrams show example CB positions and paths to create banks
to each pocket, and online video NV C.15 demonstrates alternative paths for some of the banks. Give the
drill a try and keep track of how many attempts it takes you to pocket each of the six banks. Record the
numbers so when you try the drill again in the future, you can track your improvement over time.

                                                        5
                   6                                                       9
                                                                                              4

                                                                                  C-1
                                                                        C-3 C-2

                   1                                                                          3
                                                        2

                        Diagram 2 Bank to all pockets challenge drill – pockets 1-3

Billiards Digest                                                                                     February, 2013
                                                            5
                        6                                                     9
                                                                                               4

                                                                                         C-4

                                                                 C-6

                                                                        C-5

                        1                                                                      3
                                                            2

                             Diagram 3 Bank to all pockets challenge drill – pockets 4-6

     I hope you are enjoying and benefitting from my series of articles featuring drills from the “Video
Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).” Example clips from Disc IV can be viewed on the VEPP website or at
billiards.colostate.edu under NV C.13 through NV C.16. Next month, we’ll look at some useful jump shot
drills and advice, also from the 4th DVD.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                      NV C.13 – Shallow-angle one-rail kick drills, from VEPP IV
                      NV C.14 – Bank shot cut-angle-effects drills, from VEPP IV
normal video
                      NV C.15 – Bank-to-all-pockets challenge drill, from VEPP IV
                      NV C.16 – Jump shot drills, from VEPP IV

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” and co-author of the DVD Series: “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS)” and
“Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).”

Billiards Digest                                                                                     February, 2013
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vepp_part_xii_jump_shots.pdf
title: VEPP Part Xii Jump Shots
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEPP – Part XII: Jump Shots”                                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the twelfth article in a series based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),” a
five-disc instructional-DVD collection I recently created with fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett. VEPP is an
organized and methodical training program and pool workout. It teaches you how to develop, assess, and
track progress of skills for all facets of your game. An outline of the entire VEPP series along with video
excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/vepp. Last month, we looked at
bank shot drills and effects from Disc IV: “VEPP IV- Banks, Kicks, and Advanced Shots.” This month, we’ll
look at some useful jump shot drills and advice, also from the 4th DVD.

    If you haven’t had much experience or success jumping the cue ball (CB), you might want to view the
jump shot resource page in the FAQ section of my website (billiards.colostate.edu), which covers jump shot
technique in great detail. Here’s a quick summary of the important elements of good technique:
          1. Make sure your bridge is as high and stable as possible, while remaining comfortable.
          2. With a standard stroke, bend your bridge arm elbow to get your upper body over the CB and
             down, with your grip arm up.
          3. To jump the CB more vertically and have it land sooner, elevate the cue more.
          4. To jump the CB longer and higher, with a given cue elevation, use more speed.
          5. For the best jumping action, aim between center-ball (from the perspective of looking down the
             cue) and the resting point of the CB on the cloth. Aim lower when draw is needed or when the
             cue is elevated more.
See the resource page for more information and demonstrations.

    Diagram 1 shows the setup for the first and easiest jump drill. It is a progressive practice drill, where you
start with an easy shot and increase the difficulty level with each success. This is a good drill to start with,
especially if you haven’t had much success or experience with jump shots in the past. The goal is to jump
through or over the gap between two obstacle balls, shooting the CB into the far corner pocket. Start with the
obstacle balls one ball apart. The CB is a diamond from the balls, lined up straight to the corner pocket. With
a large gap between the obstacle balls, you don’t need much jump height to clear them. A regular playing
cue with only a slight amount of cue elevation will get the job done. With each success, close the gap a small
amount and continue. Add more speed (and check you aim) if you are having trouble clearing the obstacle
balls.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      March, 2013
                                                       jump the CB over the gap
                                                        and scratch in the corner

                             start with a
                           1 ball-width gap
                           and shrink with
                            each success

                                          Diagram 1 Ball-gap jump drill

    As shown in Diagram 2a, with about a ½-ball gap, not much cue elevation is needed (here, about 15º) to
jump the CB enough to clear the balls. Here, Bob is aiming though the center of the CB. If you are not
clearing the balls, it is probably because you don’t have enough shot speed. As the gap gets smaller, you will
need to add more cue elevation (and maybe speed) to get more jump height. Continue to narrow the gap
with each success until the obstacle balls are touching. Even with the balls touching, you still don’t need to
jump over a full ball height. You might be successful with a regular playing cue, but a lighter and shorter jump
cue with a hard tip will make jump shots much easier. After succeeding with the gap closed, replace the two
balls with a single ball in line with the shot. Now you will be jumping an entire ball. In NV C.16, we
demonstrate how to aim carefully. When some people elevate the cue, their visual alignment tends to shift.
Be careful to not do this, and consider trying the aiming method we demonstrate in the video. It is also very
important that the cue tip be aligned with the vertical centerline of the CB. If you are off center even slightly,
the CB will swerve off line, and you won’t have much success with jump shot accuracy.

                       Diagram 2 Jump shot stance and cue elevation differences

     Diagram 3 shows the setup for a drill useful in working on higher cue elevation shots, where you need to
jump over a closer obstacle and/or land the CB over a shorter distance. The goal in this drill is to jump over a
full ball and pocket the hanger in the corner. Start out with the CB close to the rail to make it easier to create
an elevated bridge, and start with the obstacle ball 4-5 balls from the CB. This drill can be difficult or
impossible with a regular playing cue (especially if the tip is soft); but with practice, you should be successful
with a jump cue. Higher cue elevations are required with this drill, as compared to the previous one. You
don’t want the CB to still be hopping when it reaches the object ball, because this can cause one or both of
the balls to jump off the table, which is a foul. This is also important in game situations where you are
jumping to cut a ball in, because the effective cut angle will be different if the CB hits the OB while airborne

Billiards Digest                                                                                       March, 2013
(for more information and demonstrations, see the jump shot overcut resource page in the FAQ section of my
website).

                                                       1

                                                               jump over
                                                           the obstacle stripe
                                                           to pocket the solid

                                                                 shorten
                                                                distance
                                                                with each
                                                                 success

                                 Diagram 3 High-and-quick jump-shot drill

    With each shot success, advance the obstacle ball about a ball or ½-ball closer to the CB, and be sure to
chalk the tip before each shot. Also remember to keep your bridge hand as stable and still as possible, keep
your grip very light during the entire stroke, and stay on the vertical centerline of the CB. As the obstacle ball
gets closer to the CB, you will need to elevate the cue more to get the CB up and over the ball soon enough.
At modest cue elevations, most people prefer a standard underhand stroke as shown in Diagram 2b. With
higher cue elevations, you might find an overhand “dart” stroke (see Diagram 2c) more comfortable and
effective. As demonstrated in the NV C.16, the “dart” stroke uses a flicking or throwing motion, mostly with
the wrist. Again, it is important to keep the grip (in this case, with the first 3 fingers) as light as possible.

     For modest-elevation jump shots (as in the first drill) you can aim through the center of the CB, but this
won’t work well for high elevations. With higher elevations, you need to be careful to not jamb the CB into the
table. As shown in Diagram 4, you need to aim through the resting point of the CB (Diagram 4b) or even
lower (Diagram 4c) if necessary. Aim lower as the elevation increases. And don’t be afraid to drive the tip
into the table, as long as you don’t try to “muscle” it. If you can jump the CB over an obstacle ball less than a
ball-width away, you’re doing quite well; although, this takes some practice to be accurate and consistent.
See NV C.16 is you want to see a demonstration.
                           nd
     After you master the 2 drill with your bridge on the rail, place the CB and obstacle ball farther from the
rail, where you will need to bridge on the table instead. This makes the drill more difficult because you will
have less stroke length available and will need to accelerate the cue more quickly over a shorter distance.
Again, make sure your bridge and body are as stable and still as possible during the entire shot. See NV
C.16 for more useful advice and for demonstrations of both drills.

                                           center

                                                     resting
                                                      point

                                   a.) through the         b.) through the       c.) below the
                                        center                  resting              resting
                                                                 point                point

                                     Diagram 4 Line of action of the cue

Billiards Digest                                                                                       March, 2013
     I hope you are enjoying and benefitting from my series of articles featuring drills from the “Video
Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).” Example clips from Disc IV can be viewed on the VEPP website or at
billiards.colostate.edu under NV C.13 through NV C.16. Next month, we’ll look at some useful concepts
and drills for improving your safety game.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                      NV C.13 – Shallow-angle one-rail kick drills, from VEPP IV
                      NV C.14 – Bank shot cut-angle-effects drills, from VEPP IV
normal video
                      NV C.15 – Bank-to-all-pockets challenge drill, from VEPP IV
                      NV C.16 – Jump shot drills, from VEPP IV

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” and co-author of the DVD Series: “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS)” and
“Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).”

Billiards Digest                                                                                       March, 2013
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vepp_part_xiii_safety_and_carom_challenge_drills.pdf
title: VEPP Part Xiii Safety And Carom Challenge Drills
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEPP – Part XIII: Safety and Carom Challenge Drills”                           ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the thirteenth article in a series based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP),” a
five-disc instructional-DVD collection I recently created with fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett. VEPP is an
organized and methodical training program and pool workout. It teaches you how to develop, assess, and
track progress of skills for all facets of your game. An outline of the entire VEPP series along with video
excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/vepp. Last month, we looked at
useful jump shot drills and advice from the 4th DVD: “VEPP IV - Banks, Kicks, and Advanced Shots.” This
month, we’ll look at useful and fun safety and carom challenges from the 5th DVD: VEPP V - Challenges,
Games, and Advice.

      Safety play is an important part of the game; that is, if you want to be a good player. When’s the last time
you’ve spent practice time working on defensive shots? For most people, the answer is either “a long time
ago” or “never.” In my December ’12 article, I presented some drills that one can use to practice safety drills,
but some people find “drills” monotonous and boring. Online video NV C.17 demonstrates a safety challenge
game that might be more fun while still offering important practice at defensive play. The game is simple.
Start with a 9-ball break, and then play a safety on every shot. It’s more fun to play against an opponent, but
you can also play alone. If playing an opponent, keep score by awarding a point every time the opponent fails
to hit a legal shot after a safety. Jump shots are disallowed to force you to practice other types of safety
escapes. After the break, if you pocket a ball, you have the option to play a safe or have your opponent go
first. If you don’t make a ball on the break, your opponent has the option. As with 9-ball, you are always
required to contact the lowest-numbered ball first. You are allowed to pocket balls, and sometimes that can
be to your advantage in this game, but generally you attempt to play safe by sending the current object ball
(OB) and cue ball (CB) in places that will snooker your opponent.

     NV C.17 shows me and Bob trading safeties back and forth. Check it out and give it a try with a friend.
The drill is challenging and fun and it will give you good practice with safeties and safety escapes. Diagrams
1 and 2 show a couple of examples from the video. In Diagram 1, there are many options for hiding the CB
and/or the 2 ball, but the choice made in the video was to lock the CB up against the 8, while sending the 2-
ball into the center of the table where it can be more difficult to hit than if it were close to a rail. Ideally, the 2-
ball would land just behind the 7 to at least partially block some kick options. That’s a good safety. It would
be difficult to hit the 2 from this position.

Billiards Digest                                                                                              April, 2013
                                      Diagram 1 Safety game – shot 1

     Diagram 2 shows another example shot from later in the game. Here, the goal is to send the 2 up table,
creating as much distance as possible, while trying to hide the CB behind the 3, 4, or 7. Check out the video
to see many more safety and safety-reply examples, and give the challenge drill a try. You’ll see that it can
be fairly difficult to score points, especially if playing against a decent player. But when you do, the power of
ball in hand after an opponent foul gives you the opportunity string points together ... unless you’re playing
Efren or any of the Filipinos who seem to be able to kick at anything, regardless of the number of cushions
required.

                                      Diagram 2 Safety game – shot 2

    NV C.18 demonstrates another fun challenge drill, in this case for practicing carom shots. A carom shot
is where you deflect the CB off an OB, usually to pocket a 2nd OB. The carom challenge drill is called “Loop,”
which is “pool” spelled backwards. The name is inspired by the fact that the game is played backwards. You

Billiards Digest                                                                                        April, 2013
strike the OB ball instead of the CB, and the goal is to carom the OB off the CB into a pocket. This gives you
good practice with carom shots, and it is a fun game to play either alone or with an opponent.

     Starting with a full 15-ball break shot, the goal is to carom all of the OBs in with as few shots as possible.
If you’re playing an opponent, you can score a point for each successful carom. For the break, use the 1 ball
as the CB, and place the actual CB in the top position of the rack (where the 1-ball would normally be). On
every shot, including the break shot, the goal is to pocket the OB by caroming it off the CB. On the break,
shooting from the head spot with about a 1/3-ball hit on the CB will spread the rack some and pocket the 1 in
the corner. After the break, you are allowed to shoot the OBs in any order. As demonstrated in NV C.18,
sometimes the best choice for which ball to carom is decided by whether or not you need to break up clusters
(for example, from or a poorly dispersed rack).

     Diagrams 3 and 4 show a couple of shots from the video. The 90º rule for stun shots, the 30º rule for
rolling-ball shots, and the trisect system for draw shots are very useful for aiming carom shots. Lots of
information and numerous demonstrations of these systems can be found in the position control FAQ page of
my website. Diagram 3 shows a good strategic example, where the goal is to carom the 5 off the CB into the
side pocket using the 90º rule to pot the ball and hopefully send the CB off the end rail with enough speed to
break up a cluster down table. In NV C.18, the break out doesn’t go exactly as planned, but the carom still
works.

                                           Diagram 3 Loop – shot 1

    Diagram 4 shows another example from later in the same game. Here, the 30º rule natural angle is
perfect for the 9-ball off the CB into the corner, and the CB will kiss off the 14 and end up in a great place for
a follow-on carom of the 12 or 15 into the side, which will help open the ball cluster. After you play this game
some, you’ll realize that there is a lot of strategy involved. Check out NV C.18 for more examples and to see
how important strategy can be. Also, try out “Loop” yourself and work on the carom skills that can help you
win games and matches in the future.

Billiards Digest                                                                                         April, 2013
                                               Diagram 4 Loop – shot 2

    I hope you are enjoying and benefitting from my series of articles featuring drills from the “Video
Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).” As with all of the drills on VEPP, you should record your scores and
track your improvement over time. The “How to Use VEPP” document on the VEPP website contains some
sheets to help with this. Scores are useful for assessment and to provide a challenge. You can also use
them to set goals for future improvement. Next month, we’ll look at a useful approach to practice where you
create and work on customized drills based on you specific areas of weakness.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                      NV C.17 – Safety challenge game and drill, from VEPP V
                      NV C.18 – "Loop" carom game drill, from VEPP V
normal video

PS:
              I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” and co-author of the DVD Series: “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS)” and
“Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).”

Billiards Digest                                                                                        April, 2013
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/vepp_part_xiv_custom_drills.pdf
title: VEPP Part Xiv Custom Drills
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“VEPP – Part XIV: Custom Drills”                                            ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP), and all
of my past articles can be accessed and viewed online at billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used
in the articles help you locate the resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet
connection, you might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at:
dr-dave-billiards.com.

    This is the fourteenth and final article in a series based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice
(VEPP),” a five-disc instructional-DVD collection I recently created with fellow BD columnist Bob Jewett.
VEPP is an organized and methodical training program and pool workout. It teaches you how to develop,
assess, and track progress of skills for all facets of your game. An outline of the entire VEPP series along
with video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/vepp. Last month, we
                                                                    th
looked at useful and fun safety and carom challenges from the 5 DVD: “VEPP V - Challenges, Games, and
                                                                                 th
Advice.” This month we’ll look at a useful approach for practice, also from the 5 DVD, where you create and
work on customized drills based on you specific areas of weakness.

      It is important to practice the shots and techniques that you are good at so you can maintain those skills.
However, it is just as important to practice the skills you don’t yet have. It is also important to practice the
shots that give you trouble in typical game situations. Whenever you play or compete, you should always
keep track of the shots that don’t work out as you had planned. That way, you can work on these things
specifically the next time you practice. A good way to structure your work on these problem areas is with a
“progressive practice” drill, where the difficulty level starts out easy and gradually increases. For example,
when Bob and I were filming VEPP, Bob had a little trouble at first predicting the exact cue ball (CB) path off
the cushion on a few rail cut shots. Diagram 1 shows a good custom drill that can be used to work on this
skill. The goal is to pocket the 1-ball and send the CB cross table at the desired angle, in this case to hit the
target ball on the opposite cushion. The first target position (“A”) is straight across the table, so a stun shot
would work, but this is less easy to control than a rolling CB. However, with a rolling CB, you need a touch of
right sidespin to achieve the desired line. This and other shots in this drill are demonstrated in NV C.19; but
don’t just watch ... also practice them the next time you’re at a table.

                             Diagram 1 Custom rail-cut-shot CB-direction drill

Billiards Digest                                                                                        May, 2013
    After practicing and succeeding with the first shot in Diagram 1 several times, progressively advance the
target ball up table to develop a feel for how you need to adjust speed and spin to send the CB along each of
the desired lines. For target position “B,” you can still use a rolling CB, but you need to add more sidespin.
The amount of sidespin required will vary some with table conditions. The CB direction will also vary a little
depending on how much you might cheat the pocket, which changes the cut angle slightly. Sidespin makes
the shot more difficult because you need to be able to adjust for the squirt and swerve that comes with using
english. For information and demonstrations for how to compensate for squirt and swerve, see the “aim
compensation” FAQ page on my website. For target position “C,” Bob used nearly maximum english, still
allowing the CB to roll. For target position “D,” Bob used near maximum sidespin with slight draw to create
drag which increases the effect of the sidespin. See how high you can send the CB up table using draw,
sidespin, and/or pocket cheating. The side pocket was close to the limit on my table.

    Diagram 2 shows another example custom progressive drill that focusses on a common “problem shot”
for many people. The goal is to pocket the 2-ball and send the CB directly across the table a controlled
amount. We have a printable target available on the VEPP website that you can cut out to serve as the CB
goal position. Start with the target one diamond off the long rail, and progressively move it farther away with
each success. The CB is always shot from the same spot, across from the side pocket a diamond off the rail.
We have a demonstration of the drill in NV C.20. Because there is a slight cut angle on this shot, a stun shot
would send the CB along the tangent line, which would send the CB a little up table. One approach to having
the CB head straight across table instead is to make sure the CB has a slight amount of forward roll when it
reaches the object ball. In the video, for the starting target position, Bob uses a center-ball hit at medium
speed to accomplish the task. The CB picks up a little forward roll by itself on the way to the 2-ball.

                               Diagram 2 Custom stun-across-the-table drill

      As you add more speed to send the CB to the more-distant target positions, you will need to raise the tip
a little to allow the CB to develop slight forward roll. As we demonstrate in NV C.20, as long as you end up
within a hand span of the target, call it good. This drill is challenging because you need to be accurate with
the exact cut angle of the shot (i.e., you can’t cheat the pocket too much), the amount of CB forward roll at
impact needs to be fairly precise, and the speed needs to be good to reach the target distance. Try out the
drill and practice sending the CB to each of the target positions shown in the diagram. Even with the
relatively small cut angle of the shot, it is still easy to get the CB across the entire table width. The key is to
be accurate and consistent at the different distances so you will be able to control the CB when needed in a
game situation.

Billiards Digest                                                                                          May, 2013
    Again, keep track of shots you miss during matches and run-out drills and develop and practice your own
custom drills like the examples above. With practice, hopefully you won’t miss those same shots again the
next time them come up in a match. I hope you have enjoyed and benefitted from my series of articles
featuring drills from the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).”

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                      NV C.19 - Custom drills - rail cut shots with english, from VEPP V
normal video
                      NV C.20 - Custom drills - stun across the table with rail cut shots, from VEPP V

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally
               familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand,
               please refer to the online glossary on my website.

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” and co-author of the DVD Series: “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS)” and
“Video Encyclopedia of Pool Practice (VEPP).”

Billiards Digest                                                                                         May, 2013
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veps_gems_part_i_introduction.pdf
title: VEPS Gems Part I Introduction
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“VEPS GEMS - Part I: Introduction”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

    I am very excited because this is my six-year-anniversary issue as a BD instructional
columnist. The reason why six years is an important benchmark for me is I’m a university
professor in my “day job;” and in academia, six years is the amount of time you have to prove
yourself for tenure. If you do a good job during those first six years, you get tenure and basically
have a job for life (because you have earned it). If you don’t meet expected standards, you are
“downsized” (i.e., “canned”). Now I feel like I have Billiards Digest “tenure.” I can’t believe it has
been six years already, and I look forward to many more. When I wrote my first article, I had a list
of about 50 topics I wanted to cover. At first, I was concerned I might eventually run out of ideas;
but now, I’m sure I’ll never get to all of them. After covering 72 topics, my “list” has grown to
about 80 topics yet to be covered!!! That’s more than 6 more years’ worth, even if I don’t think of
anything else to add.

    I’m also excited this month because Tom Ross (a past BD columnist) and I just finished an
ambitious project called “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS).” We started planning
VEPS over a year ago, and we spent most of the past summer filming and editing video. Over
the next several months I would like to highlight some interesting shots and “gems” from the
series.

     Have you ever thought about how many different types of shots are both possible and
realistic at a pool table? Well, the goal for me and Tom was to address this question ... and not
leave any rock unturned. We wanted to include only shots that are practical and useful in typical
game situations at a pool table, but we couldn’t resist including a few proposition and trick shots.
Our goal wasn’t to invent many shots, but to catalog everything we could find and think of, and
present all of it within an organized, progressive, bottom-up tutorial framework. We drew
inspiration from Ray Martin’s “99 Critical Shots in Pool,” which does a good job of summarizing
many of the most common types of shots, and Byrne’s “Complete Book of Pool Shots,” which is
an impressive collection of 350 different shots, with many inspired by three-cushion billiards.
However, our intention was to provide an exhaustive compilation in video format, where each
shot could be demonstrated on a real table. It’s one thing to see a shot diagrammed in a book,
but it’s another thing entirely to actually see it executed. We also liked that video would allow us
to add the extra dimensions of overlaid graphics, narration, and slow-motion replay.

     The complete catalog of shots that Tom and I came up with, organized into five major areas
and fifty distinct categories, is listed below. The total number of shot types within the fifty
categories amounts to over 750!!! The complete list can be viewed online at: dr-dave-
billiards.com/veps. Isn’t it amazing how many options exist at a pool table? That’s one of the
reasons why this game is so much fun. Here’s the list of the fifty main categories:

I. Basic Shot Making and Position
    1. cut shots
    2. stun shots
    3. follow shots

Billiards Digest                                                                         January, 2010
     4. draw shots
     5. CB direction control
     6. CB speed control
     7. avoiding a scratch
     8. combination shots
     9. carom (OB kiss) shots
     10. billiard (CB kiss) shots

II. English and Position Control
     11. English (sidespin) basics
     12. English effects and aim correction
     13. rail cut shots
     14. CB path control
     15. basic position play shots
     16. advanced position play shots
     17. center-of-table position shots
     18. straight-in position play shots
     19. OB-hanger CB path control
     20. multiple-rail position play shots

III. Safety Play and Strategy
     21. defensive safety shots
     22. offensive safety shots
     23. safety replies
     24. ball-in-hand options
     25. general strategy
     26. 8-ball strategy
     27. 9-ball strategy
     28. rail-first shots
     29. clearance and cluster break-out shots

IV. Banks, Kicks, and Advanced Shots
    30. bank and kick shot generalities
    31. one-rail kick shots
    32. multiple-rail kick shots
    33. bank shots
    34. frozen-ball shots
    35. frozen-rail shots
    36. ticky shots
    37. double kiss shots
    38. kiss-back shots
    39. throw shots
    40. spin-transfer shots

V. Skill and Specialty Shots
   41. power shots
   42. jump shots
   43. massé shots
   44. break shots
   45. cushion and point compression shots

Billiards Digest                                 January, 2010
      46. pocket point and wall shots
      47. game run-outs
      48. fouls
      49. proposition and “cute” shots
      50. famous trick shots (“Top Ten”)

    If you look at the complete list of shots online, you will notice that many of them are
designated as “GEMS.” The “gem” label helps us emphasize a shot or concept that we feel is
particularly important to know as a pool player, whether understood explicitly or in a more intuitive
way. Over the next several months, I will present and discuss some of the more interesting
“gems” from each of the five major areas. If you would like to see a preview, samples are
provided online. NV B.64 provides an overview of the entire series, in “trailer” format. NV B.65
discusses and demonstrates proper technique for executing long power-draw shots. NV B.66
demonstrates the 30° rule and the peace-sign technique, along with examples of how to use
them to predict cue ball direction. NV B.67 presents the trisect system for draw shots, and shows
how you can use a modified peace-sign to help visualize the final cue ball motion. NV B.68
demonstrates how to plan and execute cluster break-out shots using cue ball reference
directions. Finally, NV B.69 illustrates how to aim various types of carom shots using the 90° and
30° rules. If you want more information on any of these topics, they are covered in several of my
recent articles, which can be viewed at my website (billiards.colostate.edu).
                      NV B.64 – Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS) video series trailer
                      NV B.65 – Power draw technique advice from VEPS I
                      NV B.66 – The 30° rule, from VEPS I
normal video          NV B.67 – The trisect system for draw shots, from VEPS I
                      NV B.68 – Tweener cluster breaks, from VEPS I
                      NV B.69 – Carom shots, from VEPS I

    Well, I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles highlighting shots and “gems”
from the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots” series. I look forward to sharing as much as I can
from the series because it has been a true labor of love for me and Tom over the last year. Next
month, we’ll look at selected “gems” from the first main category of shots.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        If you want to refer to any of my previous articles and resources, you can access them
               online at billiards.colostate.edu.
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, impact
               line, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
               come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
               glossary on my website.
      •        I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help
               find errors and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts.
               Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD:
“High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                January, 2010
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veps_gems_part_ii_basic_shot_making_and_position.pdf
title: VEPS Gems Part Ii Basic Shot Making And Position
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“VEPS GEMS - Part II: Basic Shot Making and Position”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the second article based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” an
instructional video series I recently created with past BD columnist and good friend Tom Ross.
Last month I introduced the series and presented the complete catalog of shot categories. VEPS
contains over 750 shot types within 50 main categories and five major areas. This month I will
highlight several “gems” from the first major area: “Basic Shot Making and Position,” which is the
topic of the first DVD in the set. “Gems” are shots or concepts Tom and I think are important to
know as a pool player, whether understood explicitly or in a more intuitive way. The complete list
of shot types in each major area, an outline of the entire VEPS series, and video excerpts from
each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/veps.

     The first “gems” I will present involve how to aim cluster break-out shots. Diagram 1 shows a
situation where we want to pocket the 11-ball and also break out the 12-ball-13-ball cluster to
create an opportunity to run-out and win the game. As shown in the diagram, the cluster is
between the natural-angle direction predicted by the 30º rule for a rolling cue ball (CB) (see NV
B.66) and the tangent-line direction predicted by the 90º rule for a stun shot. (For more
information about how to predict CB direction for different types of shots, see NV B.43.) Because
the cluster lies between the two CB reference directions, we need to make sure the CB has only
partial roll (about half of full roll) when it strikes the 11-ball. Again, no roll (stun) would send the
CB in the tangent-line direction, and full roll would send the CB in the natural-angle direction.
With medium speed, a hit just above center will create half roll and send the CB into the heart of
the cluster. With a solid carom into the cluster, as shown, we should expect a follow-up shot at
the either the 12-ball or 13-ball, or both, as demonstrated in NV B.68.

Billiards Digest                                                                          February, 2010
                                                           partial
                                                            roll

                                                       8
                                   rolling ball                            11
                                30º natural angle

                                stun shot
                             90º tangent line
                                                           13 12

                           Diagram 1 Roll-stun “tweener” break-out shot

                   NV B.43 – Cue ball position control stun, roll, and draw reference lines
                   NV B.66 – The 30° rule, from VEPS I
normal video
                   NV B.68 – Tweener cluster breaks, from VEPS I

    In Diagram 2, the cluster is between the tangent-line direction and the good-action draw-shot
direction predicted by the trisect system (see NV B.67 and NV B.68). My March '06 article
covered the trisect system in detail; but to summarize, the final CB direction with a “good action”
draw shot is three-times the cut angle away from the original direction (see “A” and “2A” in the
diagram). Because the 12-ball-13-ball cluster again lies between the two CB reference
directions, we need to make sure the CB has about half the “good action” amount when it strikes
the 11-ball. Again, a stun shot would send the CB along the tangent line, missing the cluster to
the left. And a good-action draw shot would cause the CB to miss to the right. With medium
speed, and about 75% tip offset, we should see the CB head into the heart of the cluster. And as
with the previous example, we should expect a follow-up shot to enable us to continue the run
(see NV B.68).

Billiards Digest                                                                          February, 2010
                                               medium
                                                draw
                                      8
                                                                      A

                                                                 2A
                        “good-action” draw
                          trisect direction
                                                                          11

                                                 13
                                                 12

                               stun shot
                            90º tangent line

                          Diagram 2 Draw-stun “tweener” break-out shot

                   NV B.67 – The trisect system for draw shots, from VEPS I
normal video

     The next two “gem” shots are caroms, where the object ball (OB) is kissed off another ball.
Diagram 3 shows what is often referred to as a “wired” carom. Here the 3-ball is frozen to the
13-ball, and the tangent line off the 13-ball points straight into the heart of the pocket. In this
case, the 3-ball can be pocketed using a wide range of speeds and with a wide range of CB
contact points on the 3-ball. As shown in NV B.69, even with a small gap between the 3-ball and
13-ball, the 3-ball will still head straight into the pocket after the carom because the 3-ball cannot
develop enough forward roll (topspin) over the short distance (gap) between the balls. With a
larger distance, to use the same 3-ball ghost-ball target on the 13-ball, you would need to use
more speed to minimize the amount of roll the 3-ball develops on the way to the 13-ball. As
shown in NV B.69, with slower speed, the CB picks up forward roll (topspin) on the way to the 13-
ball, and the 3-ball curves forward of the tangent line missing the pocket.

Billiards Digest                                                                         February, 2010
                                                         13
                                     wired carom              3
                                      off 13-ball
                                     tangent line
                                                                     4

                                                    8

                                  Diagram 3 Wired carom shot

     Diagram 4 shows a natural-angle carom example. Here, the 12-ball blocks the direct path
for a cut shot of the 3-ball into the pocket. However, the 3-ball can be kissed off the 13-ball
instead and pocketed. Unlike the previous example, where acquired topspin was to be avoided,
here we want the 3-ball to have full roll. Luckily, in this example, the required direction off the 13-
ball is very close to the 30° natural angle for a rolling CB (see NV B.66). So with a slow-enough
hit on the 3-ball, it will easily develop roll before the 13-ball and carom towards the pocket. And
as predicted by the 30° rule, this will occur with a wide range of contact points (ball-hit fractions)
on the 13-ball (i.e., there is a fairly wide margin for error). Whenever a carom shot happens to be
lined up in the natural-angle direction like this, it is nearly as automatic as a wired carom ...
provided you don’t shoot too hard, preventing the OB from developing full roll.

Billiards Digest                                                                          February, 2010
                                           natural angle       13     12
                                                                 3
                                         for rolling 3-ball

                                                                           4
                                                                3

                                                               8

                                     Diagram 4 Natural-angle carom shot

    Example “gems” from the first VEPS DVD, including the ones discussed above, can be
viewed on the VEPS website or at billiards.colostate.edu under NV B.65 through NV B.69.

                      NV B.69 – Carom shots, from VEPS I
normal video

    Well, I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles highlighting shots and “gems”
from the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots” series. Next month, we’ll look at selected “gems”
from the second main category of shots: “English and Position Control.”

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, ball-hit
               fraction, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
               come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
               glossary on my website.
      •        I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help
               find errors and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts.
               Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD:
“High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                February, 2010
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veps_gems_part_iii_english_and_position_control.pdf
title: VEPS GEMS - Part III: English and Position Control
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“VEPS GEMS - Part III: English and Position Control”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the third article based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” an
instructional DVD series I recently created with past BD columnist and good friend Tom Ross.
VEPS contains over 750 shot types within 50 main categories and 5 major areas. Many clips in
the series are also designated as “gems” indicating shots or concepts important to know as a pool
player, whether understood explicitly or in a more intuitive way. An outline of the entire VEPS
series, the complete list of shot types in each major area, the gem designations, and video
excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/veps. Last month we
looked at some gems from the first DVD: “VEPS I: Basic Shot Making and Position.” This month,
we’ll look at selected gems from the second DVD: “VEPS II: English and Position Control.”

      Diagrams 1 and 2 illustrate example rail cut shots where English is required to get position on
the next ball, and where the outcome very much depends on whether or not you hit the ball or rail
first. The first example, Diagram 1 (VEPS Shot # 226), calls for a rail-first hit along with running-
English and stun (no follow or draw). With the rail-first hit, the cue ball (CB) comes off the tangent
line of the 13-ball nearly straight across the table. Upon reaching the second rail, the counter-
clockwise spin from the right English then sends the cue ball slightly up-table for excellent
position on the 8-ball.

                                                                         8          13

                                                                                5        7

                              rail-first
                          running English
                             stun shot

                                                               CCW spin
                                                           from right English

                      Diagram 1 Rail-first running-English position play

Billiards Digest                                                                             March, 2010
     With the layout in Diagram 2 (VEPS Shot # 227), the 5-ball and 7-ball obstacles force us to
use a ball-first hit. Hitting the 13-ball just before the rail allows the English to “take” after contact,
sending the CB well forward of the 7-ball and onto the up-table path for position on the 8-ball.
Because the 13-ball will be cut into the rail slightly, this shot would not work if the pockets were
really “tight,” or if the 13-ball were farther from the pocket. See NV B.72 for demonstrations of the
shots in both Diagrams 1 and 2, along with other rail-first vs. ball-first examples. Also included
are slow-motion clips and detailed explanations that help you understand how and why the shots
work. If you want to learn more about rail cut-shot CB control, my HSV DVD has a feature on this
topic as well (see the website for details).

                                                                                   13
                                            the English “takes” on
                                               the first rail after
                                              hitting the 13-ball          5

                                                                               7

                           ball-first
                       inside English
                   8     follow shot

                        Diagram 2 Ball-first inside-English position play

    Diagrams 3 and 4 show gems related to position routes through the center of the table.
Diagram 3, in particular, illustrates a very useful principle I call the 45º rule. If the CB rolls into
the short rail at roughly a 45º angle, it will head fairly close to the center of the table after
contacting the long rail (see Shot # 290 in NV B.74 for several demonstrations). With the layout
in Diagram 3 (VEPS Shot # 291), stun off the 13-ball ball sends the CB into the short rail at the
necessary 45º angle to create the table-center route for position on the 8-ball. There are at least
two important reasons for learning how to send the CB on a path through center table. One is
that the CB cannot head straight for a pocket (i.e., scratch) after coming off a cushion to the table
center (see NV B.74 for more info), and the other is illustrated in the next example.

Billiards Digest                                                                               March, 2010
                                                                                      13

                                                                                45º into the
                                                                                 short rail
                           stun shot

                   8                                through the
                                                      center of
                                                      the table

                   Diagram 3 45º rule position route through the center of the table

    Once you've acquired the skills and are comfortable sending the CB through the center of the
table, it is relatively easy to make adjustments to that route. Diagram 4 (VEPS Shot # 342)
shows two ways to do this for multiple-rail position on the 8-ball, where the table center is blocked
by the 5-ball and 7-ball. The tangent line off the 13-ball is approximately 45º into the short rail, so
a stun shot would send the CB into the obstacle balls. We don’t want this, but this route is a
useful reference. Relative to stun, using a little draw allows us to avoid the obstacles on the short
side of center table, while a little follow has the CB passing on the long side.

                                                                   draw to go short
                                                                     of the center
                                                                                      13

                                                               7
                                                           5

                   8

                                       follow to go long
                                         of the center

            Diagram 4 Using draw and follow to go short and long of the table center

    Example gems from the second VEPS DVD, including the ones discussed above, can be
viewed on the VEPS website or at billiards.colostate.edu under NV B.70 through NV B.74.

Billiards Digest                                                                               March, 2010
                      NV B.70 – Squirt, swerve, and throw, from VEPS II
                      NV B.71 – Back-hand English (BHE), from VEPS II
                      NV B.72 – Rail-first and ball-first shots with English, from VEPS II
normal video          NV B.73 – Leaving an angle and coming into the line of a shot, from VEPS II
                      NV B.74 – Center-of-table position and routes, from VEPS II

    Well, I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles highlighting shots and “gems”
from the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots” series. Next month, we’ll look at selected “gems”
from the third DVD: “VEPS III: Safety Play and Strategy.”

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, ball-hit
               fraction, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
               come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
               glossary on my website.
      •        I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help
               find errors and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts.
               Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD:
“High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                   March, 2010
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veps_gems_part_iv_safety_play_and_strategy.pdf
title: VEPS GEMS - Part IV: Safety Play and Strategy
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“VEPS GEMS - Part IV: Safety Play and Strategy”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the fourth article based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” an
instructional DVD series I recently created with past BD columnist and good friend Tom Ross.
VEPS contains over 750 shot types within 50 main categories and 5 major areas. Many clips in
the series are also designated as “gems,” indicating shots or concepts important to know as a
pool player, whether understood explicitly or in a more intuitive way. An outline of the entire
VEPS series, the complete list of shot types in each major area, the gem designations, and video
excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/veps. Last month we
looked at some gems from the second DVD: “VEPS II: English and Position Control.” This
month, we’ll look at selected gems from the third DVD: “VEPS III: Safety Play and Strategy.”

     Diagrams 1 and 2 illustrate how to use the 30º rule to plan strategic ball-in-hand shots. The
rule predicts that over a wide range of cut angles, between a 1/4-ball and 3/4-ball hit, the cue ball
(CB) will deflect very close to 30º from its original direction after hitting the object ball (OB). This
angle can be visualized using the peace-sign technique. See NV B.66 for demonstrations,
examples, and further explanation. A one-page summary of the 30º rule can be found in the
instructor/student resources section of my website.

                   NV B.66 – The 30-degree rule, from VEPS I
normal video

    Diagram 1 (VEPS Shot # 408, demonstrated in NV B.75) shows a 9-ball 30º billiard
opportunity with ball-in-hand (e.g., because your opponent just fouled). Whenever the 9-ball is
close to a pocket, you should look for a possible combination, carom, or billiard shot for the win.
Here we don’t have a reasonable combo, but a billiard (CB carom) off the 1-ball is available.
Diagram 1 shows how you can use the 30º peace sign to aim the shot. If you align your index
finger in the desired billiard direction to the 9-ball, the middle finger defines the line where the CB
must be placed for a slow-roll ½-ball hit. With a well-calibrated peace sign, this shot is much
easier than it may appear. For more info, see NV B.66.

Billiards Digest                                                                              April, 2010
                                                                                                            9

                                                      ball-in-hand
                                                       placement
                                                                                        8
                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                 6
                                     slow roll                                                                  5
                                       shot                                  1

                                                                      30º rule
                                                                     peace sign

                   Diagram 1 Using the 30º rule for a ball-in-hand billiard victory

    Diagram 2 (VEPS Shot # 409, demonstrated in NV B.75) shows another example of how you
can use the 30º rule, in this case to aim a cluster break-out safety. This is a game of 8-ball. You
have ball-in-hand and are playing stripes. If you don’t address the 9-ball-13-ball cluster
immediately, you have very little chance to win this game, because neither of these balls can be
pocketed easily as they lie. We also can’t leave our opponent with an easy shot, because he or
she will likely run out. Here one option is to billiard the CB off the 11-ball to break out the cluster.
The shot is aimed using the 30º peace sign as above. With soft speed, the 9-ball and 13-ball are
separated slightly and block any direct route to the solids. Our chances are now good to win this
game. Whenever you get ball-in-hand after a well-executed safety or an opponent mistake, you
should always look for 30º rule opportunities like the ones in Diagrams 1 and 2.

                                                                                                    5
                                   slow roll                                                6
                                     shot
                                                                                                        8

                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                  cluster balls
                    ball-in-hand                                                  nudged free,
                     placement
                                                                                    CB hides
                                                 11                                   13
                                                                                           9

              Diagram 2 Using the 30º rule for a ball-in-hand cluster-break-out safety

Billiards Digest                                                                                                         April, 2010
      Diagram 3 (VEPS Shot # 370, demonstrated in NV B.76) shows two possible ball layouts
after a 9-ball safety. In shot “a,” the 8-ball is left fairly close to the rail; and in shot “b,” the 8-ball is
left away from the rail. The CB is hidden just as well in both cases. Our opponent has the option
to jump at the 8-ball, but let’s assume that he or she will be kicking. Which is the better place to
leave the 8-ball? Think about it before you come up with an answer. ........ (“Jeopardy” music)
.......... With the 8-ball about one ball’s width off the rail, it’s effective “size” is much larger than if it
were out in the open. As shown in Diagram 3c, there is a very wide margin for error with the 8-
ball sitting so close to a rail. The two extreme CB paths are shown, but every CB path in-
between also makes contact. The effective “size” of the 8-ball at this position is 4x or 5x the
actual size of the ball, making it almost impossible to miss! Diagram 3b shows the better safety
option, where the 8-ball is left out in the open. As illustrated in Diagram 3d, the “effective size” of
a ball here is just the size of the ball, regardless of the path. The margin for error is much smaller
when kicking at a ball sitting well-away from a rail. So it is important to remember: When hiding
the CB, don’t leave the OB close to a rail!

                                                8           effective       8
                                                            “size” of
                                8                          the 8-ball
                                 9                                                          9

                              a) close-to-rail leave                             c) “big ball”

                             b) away-from-rail leave                            d) “small ball”
                                                       8                8
                                 9                                                      9

                                8

                      Diagram 3 Leaving a “big” vs. “small” ball after a safety

    Example gems from the third VEPS DVD, including the ones discussed above, can be
viewed on the VEPS website or at billiards.colostate.edu under NV B.75 through NV B.80.
                   NV B.75 – 30-degree-rule natural-angle examples, from VEPS III
                   NV B.76 – Don't leave "big ball" for kick safety reply, from VEPS III
                   NV B.77 – Playing for exact position instead of to an area, from VEPS III
normal video
                   NV B.78 – How to choose good "key" balls, from VEPS III
                   NV B.79 – How to choose solids vs. stripes after an 8-ball break, from VEPS III
                   NV B.80 – How and when to break out clusters in 9-ball, from VEPS III

    Well, I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles highlighting shots and gems
from the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots” series. Next month, we’ll look at selected gems
from the fourth DVD: “VEPS IV: Banks, Kicks, and Advanced Shots.”

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                                     April, 2010
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, ball-hit
          fraction, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
          come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
          glossary on my website.
      •   I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help
          find errors and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts.
          Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD:
“High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                               April, 2010
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veps_gems_part_ix_plus_system_adjustments.pdf
title: VEPS GEMS - Part IX: Plus System Adjustments
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“VEPS GEMS - Part IX: Plus System Adjustments”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is my ninth article based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” an
instructional DVD series I recently created with past BD columnist and good friend Tom Ross.
VEPS contains 750 shot types within 50 main categories and 5 major areas. Many clips in the
series are also designated as “gems,” indicating shots or concepts important to know as a pool
player, whether understood explicitly or in a more intuitive way. An outline of the entire VEPS
series, the complete list of shot types in each major area, the gem designations, and video
excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/veps. Last month, we
looked at the Plus System used to aim two-rail kick shots off a short rail, from the fourth DVD:
“VEPS IV - Banks, Kicks, and Advanced Shots.” This month, we’ll look at how to make
adjustments to the Plus System at its extremes, where the basic system breaks down if you don’t
alter shot speed, the amount of English, and/or your aim point. If you don’t remember the Plus
System basics from last month, be sure to review by reading my August article and/or by viewing
NV B.84.

      Diagram 1 shows how to make an adjustment to the system when aiming at large diamond
numbers on the short rail. Here, the aiming line is through diamond 6 from diamond 2 on the long
rail, and the ideal Plus System thus predicts that the cue ball (CB) should head six diamonds up
table to pocket the 8-ball. However, when aiming at larger numbers on the short rail, the CB
tends to come up short of the target (see the red path in the diagram) when using the previously
established benchmark speed and English (see last month’s article for an explanation of how to
determine this benchmark or reference combination of speed and English). We can adjust for
this by using less English (see the black path in the diagram). At even larger short rail numbers,
for example, aiming from diamond 1 through diamond 7, you would need to use even less
English, or possibly none at all. Depending on table conditions, at these larger numbers, even no
English might still result in the CB coming up short of the target. If this is the case, you can also
add more speed to compensate, since as we saw last month, more speed makes the CB go
longer. Various examples of the larger-diamond-number adjustments are demonstrated in NV
B.84 (VEPS Shot # 509).

Billiards Digest                                                                      September, 2010
                                                    CB aimed through
                                                    the 6th “diamond”

                   Diagram 1 Large-diamond-number Plus System adjustment

     Diagram 2 shows how to make an adjustment to the system when aiming at small diamond
numbers on the short rail. Here, the aiming line is through diamond 2 from diamond 6 on the long
rail, and the ideal Plus System thus predicts that the CB should head two diamonds up table to
pocket the 8-ball. However, when aiming at smaller numbers on the short rail, the CB tends to go
long of the target (see the red path in the diagram) when using the reference speed and English.
We can adjust for this by using more English (see the black path in the diagram). As we saw last
month, more English makes the CB go shorter; although, the amount you will need will vary with
table conditions. On my table, the benchmark speed and English actually work just as well at
smaller numbers as at mid-range numbers (see VEPS Shot # 509 in NV B.84). However, this is
not typical and most tables will require more English at the smaller diamonds numbers.

Billiards Digest                                                                  September, 2010
                                                                                                             1
                                                         fast
                                 fast                    medium
                                                                                                            2
                                 medium                  slow
                                 slow          more English                                                  3
                          benchmark
                       speed and English                                                                    4
                                                                                                             5
                   long of                                                                                  6
                    target                                                          CB aimed through
                                            “plus” 2
                                           diamonds
                                                                                    the 2th “diamond”        7
                                           up the rail
                   8

                                          6         5               4          3    2        1

                         Diagram 2 Small-diamond-number Plus System adjustment

     Diagram 3 illustrates a situation where knowledge of English effects can help you make a
shot that would not be possible with the straight Plus System. In this example, to pocket the 8-
ball with an “on-system” shot, we need about a 1-diamond shift up table. The Plus System would
suggest that we aim from diamond 7 through diamond 1 (see the blue line in the diagram), which
would clearly result in either a scratch or deflection off the point of the pocket. Instead, we can
shift our aim to diamond 1.5 in spite of the fact that the “on-system” 1.5 diamond shift up table
would take us long of the target (see the red path in the diagram). To compensate, as described
above, we add more English to shorten the kick and allow us to pocket the 8-ball (see the black
path in the diagram). This shot (also part of VEPS Shot # 509) is also demonstrated in NV B.84.

                                                                                                             1
                                                         fast
                                 fast                    medium
                                                                                                            2
                                 medium                  slow
                                 slow          more English
                                                                                                             3
                          “on-system”
                       speed and English                                                                    4
                                                                                                             5
                                                                                     CB aimed through
                                                                                      “diamond” 1.5         6
                                                                ideal 7-to-1 line                            7
                                                   “plus” 1.5 diamonds
                   8                                    up the rail

                             7            6         5               4          3    2        1

                        Diagram 3 Plus System aim and English adjustment example

Billiards Digest                                                                                        September, 2010
    In Diagrams 1 and 2, English adjustments were made to be able to use the short-rail number
suggested by the ideal Plus System (i.e., we forced the shot to play “on system”). In Diagram 3,
English was used to alter the result of the system’s prediction. Regardless of which approach
you may be using on a particular shot, it is important to know the effects of English and speed
that we covered last month. Furthermore, it is essential to practice on a particular table to
develop a feel for how, what, when, and how much to adjust.

   Example gems and other shots from the fourth VEPS DVD, including the ones discussed
above, can be viewed on the VEPS website or at billiards.colostate.edu under NV B.81 through
NV B.86.
                      NV B.81 – Bank and kick shot terminology and basics, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.82 – Rolling-cue-ball through-diamond kick-shot aiming system, from
                      VEPS IV
                      NV B.83 – Shallow-angle contact-point-mirror-image kick-shot aiming system,
normal video
                      from VEPS IV
                      NV B.84 – Plus System for aiming two-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.85 – Corner-Five System for aiming three-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.86 – Cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT), from VEPS IV

    Well, I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles highlighting shots and gems
from the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS).” Next month, we’ll look at several examples
of how the Plus System can be applied in different game situations.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, ball-hit
               fraction, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
               come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
               glossary on my website.
      •        I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help
               find errors and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts.
               Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD:
“High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                               September, 2010
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veps_gems_part_v_banks_and_kicks.pdf
title: VEPS GEMS - Part V: Banks and Kicks
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                           ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“VEPS GEMS - Part V: Banks and Kicks”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the fifth article based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” an
instructional DVD series I recently created with past BD columnist and good friend Tom Ross.
VEPS contains over 750 shot types within 50 main categories and 5 major areas. Many clips in
the series are also designated as “gems,” indicating shots or concepts important to know as a
pool player, whether understood explicitly or in a more intuitive way. An outline of the entire
VEPS series, the complete list of shot types in each major area, the gem designations, and video
excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/veps. Last month we
looked at some gems from the third DVD: “VEPS III: Safety Play and Strategy.” Over the next
few months, we’ll look at selected gems from the fourth DVD: “VEPS IV - Banks, Kicks, and
Advanced Shots.”

    Let’s start with some basic terminology for bank and kick shots shown in Diagram 1. With a
bank shot, the goal is to rebound an object ball (OB) off a cushion into a pocket. Some aiming
systems assume that the rebound angle is the same as the approach angle. However, as you
acquire experience with bank shots, you soon come to realize that the rebound angle can vary
quite a bit with cut angle, English, speed, and distance to the cushion. Some aiming systems
require the angles to be measured relative to the rail groove. This is the line where a ball sits
when in contact with a cushion. Sometimes our aim point will be defined in the rail groove. In
those cases, we'll refer to the correct aim point as “across from” a certain diamond location.
Other aiming systems require the aim point to be the diamond itself, which we'll refer to as
“through a diamond."

Billiards Digest                                                                        May, 2010
                                                   2            1

                                                    b
                           ball                                    rail
                        “across”                                 groove
                          from
                        diamond

                                       approach rebound
                                         angle    angle

                        cut
                       angle
                                                    rebound shortened
                                                     due to outside cut
                       a                                                  c

                           4          3            2            1

                   “                      equal distances

                               Diagram 1 Bank shot terminology

     The rail diamonds, whether the target is the diamond itself or across from it, can be very
useful for aiming bank and kick shots. In the case of the equal-angle system, for example, we
just need to make sure there are equal diamond distances on either side of the aim point. A
shown in Diagram 1, the aiming line through the OB passes through point “a” in the lower rail
                                                  th
groove, which is across from the side pocket (4 diamond). Thus the aim point “b” is across from
      nd
the 2 diamond in the upper rail groove. If the cue ball (CB) and OB were lined up along the line
from going from a to b, with proper shot speed, the OB will head two diamonds to the other side
of the aim point and into the corner pocket (point “c”). See NV B.81 (VEPS shot #’s 472 and
482), for a demonstration of the shot. With a cut angle, as shown in Diagram 1, an adjustment
would need to be made for a small amount of clockwise spin imparted to the OB. Without an aim
adjustment, the rebound angle would be shortened as indicated by the red line in the diagram.
For more information on this and other bank and kick effects that require adjustment, see “effects
and factors to consider” under “bank and kick shots” in the FAQ section of
billiards.colostate.edu. Also, see NV B.81 for several methods that can be used to find the
equal-angle-bank aiming line in different situations.

     Diagram 2 shows a kick shot, where the goal is to rebound the CB off a cushion into an OB.
In this example, we'll assume the CB is fully rolling before contacting the first rail. As such, we
now aim through the diamond instead of the point across from it (rail groove). This helps account
for the fact that the rebound angle will be larger than the approach angle with a rolling CB. In the
diagram, the CB is being aimed directly at (through) diamond 2, which will bring it in contact with
the cushion ahead of the equal-angle position in the rail groove. This compensates for the fact

Billiards Digest                                                                           May, 2010
that topspin on the fully rolling CB will cause it to bank a little longer than the equal-angle rail-
groove system predicts. When determining the necessary line of aim, we also measure distances
along both rails at “through-diamond” points, and not along the rail grooves. In Diagram 2, the
                                                         th
line of action of the CB goes through point “a” at the 4 diamond on the bottom rail and through
                  nd
point “b” at the 2 diamond on the top rail. The CB should then head in a direction through point
"c", to pocket the OB. Note that we are still using an equal-angle method, but our reference
points are now measured at the diamonds themselves. For more information and examples of
how to use this system in different situations, see NV B.82. The through-diamond technique also
works for bank shots as long as the OB is fully rolling as it reaches the first cushion, which will be
the case at slower speeds and when the OB is not resting too close to the cushion.

                                                 b2              1

                            aimed
                          “through”
                              the
                          diamond                            larger
                                                           rebound
                                                             angle

                      a    4           3            2           1            c

                                           equal distances

                   Diagram 2 Rolling-CB, through-diamond kick shot system

     When measuring diamond distances along a rail, it is sometimes important to know exact
diamond locations at a corner pocket. As shown in Diagram 3, if measuring horizontally along
the bottom rail, the diamond is located in-line with the right-rail cushion nose (diamond “a”). And
if measuring vertically along the right rail, the diamond is located in-line with the bottom-rail
cushion nose (diamond “b”). With some “diamond systems” (e.g., the Plus and Corner-5 systems
we will look at in future articles), a single diamond is assigned to the pocket and is located at the
intersection of the cushion-nose lines (diamond “c”). In NV B.81 at the end of shot # 472, we
show how you can use your cue to measure diamond distances beyond a rail. When making
such measurements, it is important to know precisely where the corner-pocket diamond is
located.

Billiards Digest                                                                             May, 2010
                              corner pocket diamonds

                                                                     c
                                                                                b
                                                                      a

                         Diagram 3 Corner pocket diamond locations

       Have you ever wondered why great bankers frequently hit the ball hard? There is a reason ...
actually there are several reasons. For the details, see “advantages of fast speed” under “banks
and kicks” in the FAQ section of billiards.colostate.edu. The main benefit of faster speed is that
the rebound angle is less sensitive to speed changes, making the angle more predictable. The
downside is that the effective size of the pocket is smaller at faster speed, but rebound-angle
consistency is a more important factor in successful banking. Most great bankers don’t really use
“systems” to aim their shots. Instead, they rely on the “feel” they’ve developed through years and
years of practice and success. But we mere mortals can certainly benefit from a little “systems”
help. If nothing else, a system can at least give you a reference aim with which to begin. You
can then adjust relative to the reference as you gain experience and intuition. Diagram 4 (VEPS
Shot # 533) shows an example system that works quite well for fast-speed banks. You begin by
determining the equal-angle aiming line as previously illustrated in Diagram 1. Here, the equal-
angle line through the OB is again from across 4 to across 2. Then, on most tables, an
adjustment of about 1/3 of a diamond along the origination rail (top rail in Diagram 4) is
necessary. This is accomplished by simply shifting the butt end of the cue, establishing a new
the line through the OB. Then smack it just like the top bankers. The ball will usually go to the
hole, provided you’ve also compensated for any cut angle and English. Yes, banking ain’t easy
... it takes lots of practice. But the techniques offered here should help to limit the guesswork, as
well as the frustration.

Billiards Digest                                                                            May, 2010
                                                  adjustment for fast speed

                         1          2              3        4

                                                   4-to-2                     fast
                                                                              medium
                                                    line                      slow

                                             11

                                    11

                             1           2

                                 Diagram 4 Fast-speed equal-angle adjustment

   Example gems from the fourth VEPS DVD, including the ones discussed above with many
more examples, can be viewed on the VEPS website or at billiards.colostate.edu under NV
B.81 through NV B.86.
                      NV B.81 – Bank and kick shot terminology and basics, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.82 – Rolling-cue-ball through-diamond kick-shot aiming system, from
                      VEPS IV
                      NV B.83 – Shallow-angle contact-point-mirror-image kick-shot aiming system,
normal video
                      from VEPS IV
                      NV B.84 – Plus System for aiming two-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.85 – Corner-Five System for aiming three-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.86 – Cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT), from VEPS IV

    Well, I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles highlighting shots and gems
from the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS).” Next month, we’ll look at more gems from
the fourth DVD dealing with banks, kicks, and advanced shots.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, ball-hit
               fraction, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
               come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
               glossary on my website.

Billiards Digest                                                                                     May, 2010
     •    I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help
          find errors and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts.
          Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD:
“High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                           May, 2010
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veps_gems_part_vi_one_rail_kicks.pdf
title: VEPS GEMS - Part VI: One-Rail Kicks
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“VEPS GEMS - Part VI: One-Rail Kicks”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the sixth article based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” an
instructional DVD series I recently created with past BD columnist and good friend Tom Ross.
VEPS contains 750 shot types within 50 main categories and 5 major areas. Many clips in the
series are also designated as “gems,” indicating shots or concepts important to know as a pool
player, whether understood explicitly or in a more intuitive way. An outline of the entire VEPS
series, the complete list of shot types in each major area, the gem designations, and video
excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/veps. Last month we
looked at some basic terminology and systems from the fourth DVD: “VEPS IV - Banks, Kicks,
and Advanced Shots.” This month we’ll take a closer look at a one-rail kick shots.

    If you recall from last month’s article (if you don’t, you can refer back to it on my website), I
presented the through-diamond system for aiming rolling-cue ball (CB) kick shots. We saw an
example where the CB happened to be on a double-distance reference track exactly through one
of the diamonds, and the object ball (OB) was a positioned close to a corner pocket (i.e., a
“hanger”). Well, things don’t always work out that well in real life, so let’s look at how to handle
several different less-than-ideal situations.

     Diagram 1 (VEPS Shot # 488) illustrates an example where the CB is in an arbitrary position.
When kicking to a hanger in the corner pocket, an easy way to aim the kick is to first use the cue
to visualize the double-distance reference track closest to the CB. Here, the 3-to-1.5 track is
fairly close to the CB, so we start with our cue over this line. Next, we shift the butt of the cue
twice as much as the tip until the cue passes directly over the CB. This will give us the required
double-distance aiming line, in this case from 3.4 to 1.7. An easy way to shift the cue to the CB is
to move the tip 1 inch at a time while moving the butt two inches, repeating until you reach the CB
(see NV B.82 for demonstrations). After the shift, it isn’t a bad idea to check the diamond
distances to make sure the two-to-one ratio was maintained. If the numbers aren’t quite right,
you can always make a small adjustment and check again. With a rolling CB and no English, we
should pocket the 8-ball, provided we don’t use too much speed. It is very important to hit the CB
on its vertical centerline. If you are left or right of the centerline by even a small amount, you will
likely miss the OB target. Unintentional running English will tend to send the CB long, while
reverse English will cause it to come up short.

Billiards Digest                                                                             June, 2010
                        1          2           3   3.4   4

              8    12

                            11   3-to-1.5
                                   line

                            1    1.7    2

                                       Diagram 1 CB in an arbitrary position

    The through-diamond kick system doesn’t work quite as well as the approach angle gets
larger. As shown in NV B.82, when kicking at a ball in the corner, the system is fairly reliable up
to about 6 diamonds down-table, but not very accurate beyond this. Diagram 2 (VEPS Shot #
489) shows a typical result at these larger angles, in this case from 9 to 4.5. (Note: In NV B.81,
we demonstrate how you can use your cue to help visualize diamond positions beyond the table.)
With a kick at this large of an angle, the CB goes long of the target because the CB topspin
creates more post-rebound curve than it does at smaller angles. If you practice these shots, you
can learn how much you need to adjust at larger angles. It also helps to be good with arithmetic.
As demonstrated in NV B.82 (VEPS Shot # 490), shooting from close to 9 on my table requires
about a 1/3-diamond adjustment. Therefore, if we shoot from about 8.8 (two-times 4.4) and aim
at 4.7 (about 1/3 more than 4.4), will should get a good hit on the 8-ball for the win.

Billiards Digest                                                                         June, 2010
                   1        2            3      4        5       6          7          8   8.8   9

          8

                                8.8-to-4.7
                                  works

                                                                                  13
                                                                      12
                                                                 11
                  9-to-4.5
               path goes long

                       1        2        3      4   4.5 4.7

                                Diagram 2 CB goes longer at larger angles

    The examples above dealt with kicking to a “hanger” in a corner pocket. This made it easy to
count diamonds numbers since the zero reference is at the corner. However, the system can be
used for any target along a rail. Diagram 3 (VEPS Shot # 495) illustrates an example where the
OB is close to the long rail but up-table a bit. The first step to aiming this type of kick is to
estimate the desired through-diamond point on the target rail. Here, it is about 1.4 diamonds from
the corner. We now simply use this as our new zero reference for the diamond count. The next
step is to count diamond-length segments from that point until you get close to a 2-to-1 reference
track through the CB. In this case, the CB is between the 3-to-1.5 and 4-to-2 lines. Adjusting to
the center of the CB with a 2-to-1 shift from either reference brings us to the 3.5-to-1.75 track,
which should, if we’re careful with our speed and tip placement, give us a square hit on the 8-ball.
The aiming procedure for this particular shot is demonstrated in NV B.82 (VEPS Shot # 495).

Billiards Digest                                                                           June, 2010
                                         1            2         3   3.5      4

                             8      13
                        12

                                             11
                                                     3-to-1.5             4-to-2
                     start the                         line                line
                  diamond count
               from the estimated
                 through-diamond
                       point

                                         1        1.75 2

                                    Diagram 3 OB away from the corner

     The rolling-ball, through-diamond system can also be applied to kick shots off the short rails,
as demonstrated in NV B.82. The system equally applies to bank shots as long as the OB is
rolling into the cushion. With banks, we need to make sure the speed is not too fast so the OB
will reach full roll before contacting the cushion. With slow-to-medium speed, this isn't much of a
problem unless the OB is sitting very close to the cushion. Disc IV of VEPS includes some
examples of rolling-OB banks.

   Example gems and other shots from the fourth VEPS DVD, including the ones discussed
above, can be viewed on the VEPS website or at billiards.colostate.edu under NV B.81 through
NV B.86.
                   NV B.81 – Bank and kick shot terminology and basics, from VEPS IV
                   NV B.82 – Rolling-cue-ball through-diamond kick-shot aiming system, from
                   VEPS IV
                   NV B.83 – Shallow-angle contact-point-mirror-image kick-shot aiming system,
normal video
                   from VEPS IV
                   NV B.84 – Plus System for aiming two-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
                   NV B.85 – Corner-Five System for aiming three-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
                   NV B.86 – Cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT), from VEPS IV

    Well, I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles highlighting shots and gems
from the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS).” Next month, we’ll look at more gems from
the fourth DVD dealing with banks, kicks, and advanced shots.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

Billiards Digest                                                                          June, 2010
PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, ball-hit
          fraction, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
          come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
          glossary on my website.
      •   I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help
          find errors and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts.
          Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD:
“High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                               June, 2010
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veps_gems_part_vii_contact_point_mirror_kick.pdf
title: VEPS GEMS - Part VII: Contact-Point Mirror Kick
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“VEPS GEMS - Part VII: Contact-Point Mirror Kick”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is the seventh article based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” an
instructional DVD series I recently created with past BD columnist and good friend Tom Ross.
VEPS contains 750 shot types within 50 main categories and 5 major areas. Many clips in the
series are also designated as “gems,” indicating shots or concepts important to know as a pool
player, whether understood explicitly or in a more intuitive way. An outline of the entire VEPS
series, the complete list of shot types in each major area, the gem designations, and video
excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/veps. Last month we
looked at some basic systems for one-rail kick shots from the fourth DVD: “VEPS IV - Banks,
Kicks, and Advanced Shots.” This month we’ll look at a system for slow-roll kicks where the cue
ball (CB) and object ball (OB) are both fairly close to a rail. If you recall from last month, the
common through-diamond rolling-CB system breaks down at larger approach angles as the
aiming angle gets shallower relative to the rail.

     NV B.83 (VEPS Shot # 498) demonstrates the shallow-angle contact-point mirror kick system
for a slow-rolling CB. Everything below is demonstrated in NV B.83, and if you have a computer
with an Internet connection nearby, it might help to watch the video before proceeding so you can
better relate to the discussion and illustrations. As shown in Diagram 1a, this system is based on
finding the mirror image of the OB contact point relative to the nose of the cushion. This is
different from the mirror bank and kick systems in previous articles, where the mirror distance
was measured relative to the rail groove (see Diagram 1b). Remember, the rail groove is the line
where the bottom (resting point) of a ball sits when it is in contact with a cushion. Again, with the
system discussed in this article, we measure the mirror distance from the OB contact point to the
nose of the cushion, not from the center of the ghost-ball to the rail groove.

             a) contact-point cushion-nose mirror          b) ghost-ball rail-grove mirror

        Diagram 1 Ghost-ball-rail-groove vs. contact-point-cushion-nose mirror image

Billiards Digest                                                                             July, 2010
    Diagram 2 illustrates how the system is used. The first step in aiming the shot is to use your
cue or hand to measure the distance from the desired OB contact point (CP) to the nose of the
cushion. The next step is to find the mirror image of the CP relative to the nose of the cushion by
doubling the measured distance, which can easily be accomplished by shifting your cue or hand
from the CP to the cushion nose. With the CB aimed directly at this mirrored point, the system
predicts that you should pocket the ball. It is very important, though, that the CB is rolling with
slow speed. And it is also important that the CB not have any English, intentional or otherwise,
so be sure to contact the CB along its vertical centerline. This is particularly important with
steeper angles relative to the rail, where English has a larger effect on rebound angle.

                                                         fast
                                                         medium
                                                5
                                                         slow

                                           12

                                    Diagram 2 Example shot

     As demonstrated in NV B.83, when practicing, it helps to place a piece of chalk on the rail to
mark the mirrored contact point. In actual play, this would not be legal, but a good alternative is
to identify a feature in the grain of the wood or just visualize where the point is relative to the
nearest diamond. This can be useful with all kick and bank methods to help provide you with a
clear target.

     If you’ve practiced various kick and bank systems, I’m sure you will know that they don’t
always work. They can be sensitive to angle, speed, and spin, and often work better within some
angle and speed ranges as compared to others. To test the shallow-angle contact-point mirror
kick system, I did a set of experiments for the shots illustrated in Diagram 3. I encourage you to
do the same. First put down adhesive hole-reinforcement donuts (available at any office supply
store) at each ball position (1, 2, and 3), and “set” each ball by tapping down with another ball.
This will make it easy to re-spot the balls in the exact same place when doing multiple attempts at
different angles. The 2-ball is a full ball away from the rail across from the second diamond. This
is easily positioned by temporarily freezing it to another ball frozen to the cushion. The 1-ball and
3-ball centers, in turn, are directly under the edges of the 2-ball. Place donuts there and also
measure and mark the aim point on the rail for each ball with a donut. An “angle template”
available on my website (in the “Instructor and Student Resources” section under “Templates and
Diagrams”) can be used to accurately determine different CB angles into the rail. You can trim
the template and hold it down over a ball’s aim point with a piece of chalk. The chalk and the
lines on the template make it easy to visualize the aim line.

Billiards Digest                                                                            July, 2010
                                                                        1
                                                                        2
                                                                        3
                          angle
                            in
                                                         1-ball is ½ ball off rail
                                                         2-ball is 1 ball off rail
                                                         3-ball is 1 ½ ball off rail

                                Diagram 3 Setup for experiment

     After doing the experiment on my table, I found that the system worked best when the OB is
one ball away from the rail (i.e., the 2-ball shot). I pocketed it over an extremely wide range of
angles from 5° to 35°. I actually didn’t expect the system to work this well. It’s an indication of
the auto-compensation capabilities of the system (for more info, see TP B.11, where I compare
theoretical and experimental results showing why and when the shallow-angle contact-point
mirror kick system is effective). With the 1-ball shot, however, the system did not work as well. In
fact, the ball was overcut and missed the pocket at every angle except at about 35°, and was only
barely made at very slow speed. With the 3-ball shot, on the other hand, the ball was undercut at
small angles (< 25°) and was overcut at larger angles (> 35°). For medium angles (25°-35°), the
ball was pocketed if I varied the speed a little. More speed makes the CB rebound shorter, thus
increasing the amount of cut; and less speed makes the CB go longer, decreasing the amount of
cut.

    Clearly then, as shown in Diagram 4, adjustments need to be made when the OB is not in
the ideal position of one ball-width from the rail. When the OB is closer, the system results in an
overcut. You can adjust by shifting the mirrored aim point down-rail a little (see Diagram 4a).
And when the OB is farther than one ball from the rail, the system results in an undercut. Here, a
slight increase in speed provides the necessary adjustment (see Diagram 4b). Alternatively, you
can shift the mirror point up-rail a little and still use slow speed.

Billiards Digest                                                                           July, 2010
                                                             1

                                                                               typical
                                                                              over cut
                                                 fast
                                                                     aim point
                                                 medium
                                                                 shifted down-rail
                                                  slow       slightly to compensate
                                                                    for over cut

                                      fast     more speed used
                                      medium   to compensate for
                                      slow         under cut
                                                                           typical
                                                                          under cut
                                                             3

                               Diagram 4 Adjustments to the system

      In summary, if the OB is about one ball-width from the cushion, you can use the contact-point
mirror system with confidence over a fairly wide range of angles. When the OB is closer to the
rail, you need to shift the aim point slightly down-rail; and when farther, you need to shift the aim
point slightly up-rail or increase the speed slightly.

    As with all kick and bank systems, results will also vary slightly from table to table, and
sometimes even from one side of the table to the next. In view of all of this, isn’t it amazing how
effective top-notch kickers and bankers can be? But even they miss occasionally ... kicking and
banking is tough. That’s why it helps to know all of the systems and “tricks.” The more tools you
have in your toolbox, the more effective you can be when faced with these difficult shots. It also
helps to practice an insane amount, which is what all great players do.

   Example gems and other shots from the fourth VEPS DVD, including the ones discussed
above, can be viewed on the VEPS website or at billiards.colostate.edu under NV B.81 through
NV B.86.
                   NV B.81 – Bank and kick shot terminology and basics, from VEPS IV
                   NV B.82 – Rolling-cue-ball through-diamond kick-shot aiming system, from
                   VEPS IV
                   NV B.83 – Shallow-angle contact-point-mirror-image kick-shot aiming system,
normal video
                   from VEPS IV
                   NV B.84 – Plus System for aiming two-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
                   NV B.85 – Corner-Five System for aiming three-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
                   NV B.86 – Cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT), from VEPS IV

                   TP B.11 – Shallow-angle contact-point mirror kick system
technical proof

    Well, I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles highlighting shots and gems
from the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS).” Over the next few months, we’ll look at
gems from the fourth DVD dealing with multiple-rail kick shots.

Billiards Digest                                                                            July, 2010
Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, ball-hit
          fraction, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
          come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
          glossary on my website.
      •   I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help
          find errors and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts.
          Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD:
“High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                July, 2010
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veps_gems_part_viii_plus_system_intro.pdf
title: VEPS GEMS - Part VIII: Plus System Intro
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“VEPS GEMS - Part VIII: Plus System Intro”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is my eighth article based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” an
instructional DVD series I recently created with past BD columnist and good friend Tom Ross.
VEPS contains 750 shot types within 50 main categories and 5 major areas. Many clips in the
series are also designated as “gems,” indicating shots or concepts important to know as a pool
player, whether understood explicitly or in a more intuitive way. An outline of the entire VEPS
series, the complete list of shot types in each major area, the gem designations, and video
excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/veps. In the last few
months we’ve looked at several one-rail kicking systems from the fourth DVD: “VEPS IV - Banks,
Kicks, and Advanced Shots.” Over the next three months we’ll look at the Plus System that can
be used to aim two-rail kick shots off the short rail.

     The Plus System is based on the modified short-rail diamond numbers shown in Diagram 1.
The far corner pocket diamond is labeled 1, and the count increases by 1 every half diamond.
Thus, the first ½ diamond is labeled 2, the first full diamond is labeled 3, and so on. You can also
simply remember that the three visible diamonds on the short rail are designated 3, 5, and 7. The
Plus System predicts that the amount the line of the cue ball (CB) will shift up table along the long
rail is equal to the diamond through which you are aiming on the short rail. To illustrate, in the
diagram, the CB is aimed through diamond 3; therefore, the line of action of the CB should shift 3
diamonds up the long rail as shown. The system applies only for a rolling CB with running
English. This shot (VEPS Shot # 507) is demonstrated in NV B.84.

                                                                                           1
                                            CB aimed through                               2
                                            the 3rd “diamond”
                    rolling CB
                                                                                           3
                   with running
                     English                                                               4
                                                                                           5
                                  “plus” 3 diamonds
                                      up the rail                                          6
                                                                                           7

                                        Diagram 1 Plus System

Billiards Digest                                                                         August, 2010
    The Plus System is sometimes also called the Plus Two System. In my research, I wasn’t
able to find a consistent (if any) reason for the name, but here are several plausible explanations:

     1.) The first diamond is labeled 3, which is 1 “plus” 2.

     2.) A typical kick in and out of a corner pocket, as shown in Diagram 2, shifts up-table by
         two diamonds. The “plus two” shift is created by aiming through the half diamond past
         the corner pocket, which is labeled 2.

     3.) A one-diamond shift on the short rail (e.g., from the first diamond labeled 3 to the second
         diamond labeled 5) adds a two-diamond shift on the long rail.

                                                                                          1
                                            CB aimed through                              2
                                            the 2nd “diamond”
                    rolling CB
                                                                                          3
                   with running
                     English                                                              4
                                                                                          5
                                  “plus” 2 diamonds
                                      up the rail                                         6
                                                                                          7

                                          Diagram 2 Plus Two

     Unfortunately, things aren't always so simple and you will find that the system needs some
tweaking as you move from table to table. To this end, Diagram 3 illustrates an important
reference shot that can be used to calibrate the amount of spin and speed you need for the
system on a particular table. The goal is to find the right combination of the two (spin and speed),
such that aiming through diamond 5 on the short rail from the 3rd diamond on the long rail results
in the line of the CB shifting 5 diamonds up-table directly to the corner pocket. Note that with the
Plus System, the corner-pocket diamond is taken to be centered in the pocket as shown in the
diagram (see my May ’10 article for more info). The effects of spin and speed variations on the
final CB line are described next to help you understand how to make changes to find benchmark
values. The effects are also demonstrated in NV B.84 (VEPS Shot # 508).

Billiards Digest                                                                         August, 2010
                                                                                                1
                                                                                                2

                     rolling CB
                                                                                                3
                    with running
                                                                           CB aimed through
                      English                                              the 5th “diamond”    4
                                                                                                5
                                                                                                6
                                                                                                7
                                      “plus” 5 diamonds up the rail

                                      Diagram 3 Plus System reference shot

    As shown in Diagram 4, increasing the shot speed tends to result in the CB going long,
which means past the target (see the red path in the diagram). The reason is that the extra
speed causes a delay in the CB’s post-rebound curve off the first rail, resulting in contact on the
second rail farther up-table. Increasing the amount of English instead makes the CB come up
short (see the blue path in the diagram). This is because the extra English lengthens (widens)
the angle off the first rail, thus causing the CB to hit the second (long) rail farther down-table
(closer to the first rail).

                                                                                                1
                                                   fast
                             fast                  medium
                                                                                                2
                                                   slow
                             medium
                             slow             more speed
                                                                                                3
                      benchmark
                   speed and English                                                            4
                                                                                                5
                                                                  fast                          6
                   long                                           medium
                                                                  slow
                                                            more English
                                                                                                7
                                      short

                            Diagram 4 Plus System speed and English effects

Billiards Digest                                                                               August, 2010
    As indicated earlier, every table will play differently. This is why it is important to calibrate the
system by practicing the reference shot in Diagram 3. If the CB comes up short, you need to
adjust by either increasing shot speed or decreasing the amount of English. And if the CB goes
long, you can either decrease speed or increase English. You should try different combinations
of speed and English that work on a particular table, and then you can settle on a combination
that feels the most comfortable to you as your baseline. This benchmark is an important
reference when needing to make adjustments to the system, as we will see next month.

    All kick and bank systems are affected by speed and English. If you want to use any system
effectively, it is essential to practice it on a particular table. Having reference shots like the one
described above can help you quickly adjust to almost any table. So what are you doing still
reading this article? Get to a table and practice.

   Example gems and other shots from the fourth VEPS DVD, including the ones discussed
above, can be viewed on the VEPS website or at billiards.colostate.edu under NV B.81 through
NV B.86.
                      NV B.81 – Bank and kick shot terminology and basics, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.82 – Rolling-cue-ball through-diamond kick-shot aiming system, from
                      VEPS IV
                      NV B.83 – Shallow-angle contact-point-mirror-image kick-shot aiming system,
normal video
                      from VEPS IV
                      NV B.84 – Plus System for aiming two-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.85 – Corner-Five System for aiming three-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.86 – Cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT), from VEPS IV

    Well, I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles highlighting shots and gems
from the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS).” Next month, we’ll look at how to make
adjustments to the Plus System at its extremes.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, ball-hit
               fraction, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
               come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
               glossary on my website.
      •        I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help
               find errors and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts.
               Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD:
“High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                  August, 2010
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veps_gems_part_x_plus_system_examples.pdf
title: VEPS GEMS - Part X: Plus System Examples
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                                ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“VEPS GEMS - Part X: Plus System Examples”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is my tenth article based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” an
instructional DVD series I recently created with past BD columnist and good friend Tom Ross.
VEPS contains 750 shot types within 50 main categories and 5 major areas. Many clips in the
series are also designated as “gems,” indicating shots or concepts important to know as a pool
player, whether understood explicitly or in a more intuitive way. An outline of the entire VEPS
series, the complete list of shot types in each major area, the gem designations, and video
excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/veps. The last two
months, we’ve looked at the Plus System that is used to aim two-rail kick shots off a short rail.
This system is covered in detail in the fourth DVD: “VEPS IV - Banks, Kicks, and Advanced
Shots.” This month, we’ll look at several examples of how the Plus System can be applied in
different game situations. If you don’t remember the details of the system, please review my last
two articles and NV B.84.

    Last month, we saw how speed and the amount of English affect the third-rail target. For
each example in this article, I will assume that slightly less English (or slightly more speed) is
being used relative to the “benchmark” value(s) (see my August ’10 article) such that the cue ball
(CB) targets a point across from the expected diamond instead of through the diamond (see NV
B.84 and my May ’10 article for more information).

     Diagram 1 shows an example where we need to kick two rails to a target on the third rail.
With this shot, the goal is to pocket the 8-ball. While a better option might be a jump shot in this
situation, if the 14-ball were closer to the CB, or if there were other obstacle balls between the 14-
ball and 8-ball, the two-rail kick might be our only option. To hit the ghost-ball target on the 8-ball,
we need to find the appropriate diamond on the short rail (1st rail) that will give us the necessary
shift up table. And since the ghost-ball target is exactly across from the diamond next to the
pocket we will need a slight adjustment to our benchmark speed or English, as per the remarks in
the last paragraph.

Billiards Digest                                                                           October, 2010
                                                                       CB aimed through
                                                                         diamond 3.6

                                                                                           1
                                                                                           2
                                                                                           3
                                                                                               3.6
                                                                                           4
                       “across-diamond”
                            English
                                                                                           5
                                                                                           6
                                                                                           7
                                                        14
                   8

                               1          2         3        4

                              “plus” 3.6 diamonds
                                   up the rail

                                   Diagram 1 Targeting a ball on the rail

     As demonstrated in NV B.84 (shot #510 on VEPS Disc IV), the easiest way to find the correct
1st-rail diamond is to start by counting diamond distances along the long rail, from the desired
ghost-ball target, until you get close to a required through-diamond path close to the CB. As
indicated by the red lines in Diagram, if shooting from the third diamond down-table (at the side
pocket), we would need to aim through diamond “3” on the short rail to get the necessary 3-
diamond shift up table. Similarly, the line through the 4th diamond down-table and diamond “4” on
the short rail would also provide the necessary shift. Neither of these lines, however, passes
through the CB, but they are both close. Since the line through diamond “4” is slightly closer, we
will adjust our aim relative to that line. We start with the cue placed over this line. Then, given
that a one-diamond distance along the short rail (e.g., between the diamonds labeled “3” and “5”)
corresponds to a 2-diamond-distance shift along the long rail, we shift the butt of the cue twice as
much as the tip (along the rails) until the cue is aligned with the CB. This, by the way, is very
similar to the method described and demonstrated for the rolling-CB 1-rail kick system described
in my June ’10 article. In our present example, the line through diamond “3.6” on the short rail
passes through the CB and therefore provides the necessary 3.6-diamond shift up-table to our
desired ghost-ball target. To be able to pocket a shot like this, you must first practice on a given
table to develop a feel for the speed and English combinations appropriate for the system (see
last month’s article for more information).

    Diagram 2 shows a more frequently encountered situation where the target ball (8-ball) is off
the rail. Again, we begin by visualizing the required ghost-ball target next to the 8-ball. Then,
because our target is not located right on the long rail as before, we must estimate the direction
the CB will come off the 2nd rail (the opposite long rail) toward the target. This is necessary so we
can project this line through the ghost-ball target onto the long rail (the 3rd rail). (As you practice,
you will need to pay attention to the angles the CB comes off the 2nd rail to develop a better feel
for approximating this angle.) With our projected target on the 3rd rail, the procedure for

Billiards Digest                                                                           October, 2010
establishing the short rail diamond is the same as in the previous example. This is shot #511 on
VEPS Disc IV.

                                                                            CB aimed through
                                                                              diamond 3.6

                                                                                               1
                                                                                               2

                                         “across-diamond”                                      3
                                              English                                              3.6
                                                                                               4
                   projected
                   ghost-ball
                     target                                                                    5
                                                                                               6
                                                                                               7
                                8
                                                                14

                                    1         2             3        4

                                    “plus” 3.6 diamonds
                                         up the rail

                                        Diagram 2 Targeting a ball off the rail

     Diagram 3 illustrates another variation where we are now targeting a ball past the corner
pocket. As with our previous examples, we want to kick two rails to pocket the object ball (in this
case, the 11-ball) in the corner. Again, we begin with the desired ghost-ball position on the rail,
which defines the starting point for the diamond distance count. Here, the start point isn’t directly
aligned with a diamond, so we first need to note and maintain the offset past the diamond (the
distance between the blue and red lines in the diagram) when counting forward. With the Plus
System, the corner-pocket diamond is treated as centered in the pocket (see my May ’10 article
for more information), and going around the corner pocket counts as a one-diamond shift. Per
the long thin red line in the diagram, counting to four diamond segments and aiming through
diamond “4” on the short rail gets us fairly close to the CB. From this line, we can make the one-
to-two cue-pivot adjustment to get our cue directly over the CB. In this particular example,
moving the butt of the cue about a fifth of a diamond along the long rail gets us to the required
line of aim: 4.2 diamonds from our starting point on the long rail through diamond “4.2” on the
short rail. Again, with an appropriate combination of speed and English, we will pocket the 11-
ball. This is shot #512 on VEPS Disc IV.

Billiards Digest                                                                               October, 2010
                                                                                              1
                                                                                             2
                                                                                              3
                        “across-diamond”                                                     4
                             English                                                              4.2
                                                                                              5
                                                                                             6

                                                        8
                                                                                              7
                   11
                                                    7

                                               4.2 diamonds
                   1     2          3      4

                         Diagram 3 Targeting a ball past the corner pocket

      Diagram 4, our final example, shows how we can use the Plus System when faced with a
three-rail kick. Here, we are playing 9-ball and trying to get a hit on the well-hidden 5-ball. The
first step is to visualize a line about 45° off the 3rd rail to the target ball. This is the approximate
angle at which the CB will rebound off the 3rd rail for a wide range of shots. This line gives us the
projected ghost-ball position on the 3rd rail and our target for the Plus System. As before, we then
count diamond distances from this point until the shot line gets close to the CB. As with our last
example, the starting point for the count isn’t directly across from a diamond, so we need to
maintain the offset (the distance between the red and blue lines) during the count. Counting to
five diamond segments and aiming through diamond “5” on the short rail brings us close to the
CB (see the long thin red line). From this line, we can make the one-to-two cue-pivot adjustment
to get over the CB. We find that the required line of aim is from the 4.8-diamond-distance point
on the long rail through diamond “4.8” on the short rail. Again, with an appropriate combination of
speed and English, we will get a solid hit on the 5-ball. This is shot #513 on VEPS Disc IV.

Billiards Digest                                                                           October, 2010
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                    2
                       projected
                       ghost-ball
                                                                                                     3
                         target
                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                     5 4.8
                                                              “across-diamond”
                                                                                                    6
                              8                                    English
                          5
                                                                                                    7
                                  7
                                                                 9
 1

                         2            3       4       5
                                               4.8 diamonds

                                      Diagram 4 Plus System for three-rail kick

   Remember, it is essential to practice on a particular table to develop a feel for how much
speed and English to use and to know how to make adjustments (see my last two articles for
more information).

   Example gems and other shots from the fourth VEPS DVD, including the ones discussed
above, can be viewed on the VEPS website or at billiards.colostate.edu under NV B.81 through
NV B.86.
                      NV B.81 – Bank and kick shot terminology and basics, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.82 – Rolling-cue-ball through-diamond kick-shot aiming system, from
                      VEPS IV
                      NV B.83 – Shallow-angle contact-point-mirror-image kick-shot aiming system,
normal video
                      from VEPS IV
                      NV B.84 – Plus System for aiming two-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.85 – Corner-Five System for aiming three-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.86 – Cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT), from VEPS IV

    Well, I hope you enjoy and benefit from my series of articles featuring shots and gems from
the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS).” Next month, we’ll begin looking in detail at the
Corner 5 system used to aim two, three, and four-rail kick shots off a long rail.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, ball-hit
               fraction, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever

Billiards Digest                                                                                 October, 2010
          come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
          glossary on my website.
     •    I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help
          find errors and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts.
          Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD:
“High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                        October, 2010
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veps_gems_part_xi_corner_5_system_intro.pdf
title: VEPS GEMS - Part XI: Corner-5 System Intro
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“VEPS GEMS - Part XI: Corner-5 System Intro”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is my eleventh article based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” an
instructional DVD series I recently created with past BD columnist and good friend Tom Ross.
VEPS contains 750 shot types within 50 main categories and 5 major areas. Many clips in the
series are also designated as “gems,” indicating shots or concepts important to know as a pool
player, whether understood explicitly or in a more intuitive way. An outline of the entire VEPS
series, the complete list of shot types in each major area, the gem designations, and video
excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-billiards.com/veps. The last three
months, we’ve looked at the Plus System, which is used to aim two-rail kick shots off a short rail.
Starting this month, we’ll look at the Corner-5 System used to aim two-, three-, and four-rail kicks
off a long rail. This system is covered in detail in the fourth DVD: “VEPS IV - Banks, Kicks, and
Advanced Shots.”

     Recently, Bob Jewett featured the Corner-5 System over several months in his instructional
column. Some of the information I will present over the next few months will be review, but I will
also include several variations and examples of how the system is applied. Let’s start with a
refresher on the Corner-5 System basics. Diagram 1 shows the three sets of diamond numbers
used with the system, along with the formula that relates them. The first set of numbers, shown
in blue and labeled “D,” indicates the cue ball’s (CB’s) origination direction, which locates
where the aiming line through the CB crosses the rail closest to the shooter. The system is
referred to as the “Corner-5” System, because the origination number begins with “5” at the
corner pocket. As with the Plus System, the corner pocket diamond is assumed to be centered
as shown. The origination number increases by 1 for each diamond on the short-rail side of the
corner, and it decreases by ½ for every diamond on the long-rail side. For the example in the
diagram, the origination direction number (D) is 5 since the cue passes right over the corner
pocket diamond.

    The second set of numbers, shown in red and labeled “F,” indicates the first-rail number,
which locates the aiming line through a point on the first rail. The first-rail number starts with 1 at
the first diamond from the far end rail and increases by 1 for each diamond up table. Since the
                                            rd
shot in the diagram is aimed through the 3 diamond, the first-rail number (F) is 3. The third set
of numbers, shown in black and labeled “T,” indicates the third-rail number, which predicts
where the CB heads into the third rail. These numbers are the same as with the first rail, starting
                                                                          nd
with 1 at the far diamond. In the example, the CB heads through the 2 diamond, so the third-rail
number (T) is 2.

    The Corner-5 System is based on the formula: T = D – F. That is, the diamond the CB will
head toward along the third-rail (T), can be predicted by subtracting the first-rail number (F) from
the origination direction number (D). In the example, with D=5 and F=3, the system correctly
predicts that the CB will head through diamond 2 on the third rail (T = 5 – 3 = 2). As with the Plus
System, the Corner-5 System applies only for a rolling CB with running English.

Billiards Digest                                                                        November, 2010
                                   Diagram 1 Corner-5 System

     The 5-3-2 track is an important benchmark for the Corner-5 System. Many books that
present the system show the 5-3-2 track heading straight to the corner-pocket off the third rail, as
per the yellow direction in Diagram 1). On a three-cushion billiards table (which is larger than a
pool table, has no pockets, and has cushions of different properties than a pool table), this is the
direction the CB typically heads off the third rail. When the 5-3-2 track does head to the corner
pocket, we say the table plays “on system.” With typical pool tables, however, while the 5-to-3
aim will send the CB through the formula-predicted third-rail number (2 = 5 – 3) fairly accurately, it
will come up short of the corner pocket. VEPS shot #516 in NV B.85 demonstrates the
benchmark shot, showing the CB hitting the third rail target and coming up almost one diamond
short of the cornet pocket.

     Because the Corner-5 System formula does in fact predicts third-rail number so well on most
tables, it can be used very effectively when kicking two or three rails to a ball close to a long rail.
Diagram 2 shows an example where we need to contact the 3-ball to avoid a foul. The 11-ball
and 15-ball block a direct path to the 3-ball as well as any reasonable one-rail kick. The proximity
of the 15-ball also makes a jump shot difficult. However, since the 3-ball is close to a long rail, we
can easily use the Corner-5 System to get an accurate hit. In this case, since the 3-ball is just
             nd
below the 2 diamond on the third rail, the 5-3-2 track is perfect. See VEPS Shot #517 in NV
B.85 for a demonstration. In general, we are not limited to the 5-3 track to get the CB to diamond
2 on the third rail. The yellow lines and accompanying math in Diagram 2 illustrate two additional
examples of tracks which would get the job done for different CB positions.

Billiards Digest                                                                        November, 2010
                        4.5          4       3.5         3
            5               7        6        5          4             3     2           1

                                                                                 3

                            15

        6              11         2=5-3                                              8

                                                     2 = 4.25 - 2.25
        7
                        2 =6 -4

        8

                            7        6        5          4             3     2           1

                             Diagram 2 Kicking two rails at a ball on the rail

      Unfortunately, in the real world, the ball we are kicking at isn’t always at the perfect place to
be able to use the 5-3-2 benchmark shot. Diagram 3 shows an example of how we target a ball
off the rail in an arbitrary position. Here, we need to kick three rails at the 3-ball. The first step is
to find the necessary third-rail number. The 5-3-2 benchmark shot can help you visualize the
average direction off the third rail. As indicated by the yellow line, the 5-3-2 track comes off the
third rail from the through-diamond-2 position to about one diamond short of the corner pocket.
Using this, the next step is to shift this line to the object-ball (3-ball), keeping it parallel to the
benchmark track, as per the purple line. This will give us a good estimate for the CB rebound
angle off the third rail, along with the third-rail contact point indicated by the ghost ball in the
diagram. We will assume the CB comes off the second rail at close to a 45º angle, which is a
good estimate for many Corner-5 System shots. (With practice, you will get better at visualizing
this angle more accurately). Using the 45º direction, we get a required third-rail number of about
2.8. Now we need to find a line of aim through the CB where the origination number minus the
first-rail number gives us 2.8. While the necessary direction is close to the 5-3 aim-line, the CB
isn’t exactly along this track, and the target isn’t quite at 2 (2.8 versus 5 – 3 = 2). As
demonstrated by VEPS Shot #518 in NV B.85, we need to place our cue over the CB and pivot
until our aim-line goes through the two relevant numbers D and F, such that D – F= 2.8. We first
perform a small trial pivot, check the rail numbers (D and F) and then repeat until their difference
is 2.8. If you’re not comfortable with visualizing the lines or doing the arithmetic, you might find
this process a little frustrating. But with a little practice, it isn’t as difficult as it might seem at first.
In our current example, it turns out that 4.9 through 2.1 gives us the desired third-rail number (4.9
– 2.1 = 2.8).

Billiards Digest                                                                               November, 2010
                              4.5         4         3.5         3
                4.9             7         6          5          4       2.8       2         1

                                    15
                                              2.8 = 4.9 - 2.1       3
           6                   11                                           8
                                                                                                45º

           7                                                                 assumed
                                                                            direction off
                         parallel shift                                        2nd rail
                         through OB
           8
                                                  5-3-2
                                                benchmark
                                                  track

                                7         6          5          4       3                   1
                                                                                2.1

                              Diagram 3 Kicking three rails at a ball off the rail

     Example gems and other shots from the fourth VEPS DVD, including the ones discussed in
this article, can be viewed on the VEPS website or at billiards.colostate.edu under NV B.81
through NV B.86.
                      NV B.81 – Bank and kick shot terminology and basics, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.82 – Rolling-cue-ball through-diamond kick-shot aiming system, from
                      VEPS IV
                      NV B.83 – Shallow-angle contact-point-mirror-image kick-shot aiming system,
normal video
                      from VEPS IV
                      NV B.84 – Plus System for aiming two-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.85 – Corner-Five System for aiming three-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.86 – Cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT), from VEPS IV

    I hope you are enjoying and benefiting from my series of articles featuring shots and gems
from the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS).” Next month, we’ll look at additional
examples of how you apply the Corner-5 System to different types of situations on a pool table.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, ball-hit
               fraction, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
               come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
               glossary on my website.

Billiards Digest                                                                                      November, 2010
     •    I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help
          find errors and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts.
          Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD:
“High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                      November, 2010
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veps_gems_part_xii_corner_5_system_example_and_benchmark.pdf
title: VEPS GEMS - Part XII: Corner-5 System Example and Benchmark
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)             ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“VEPS GEMS - Part XII: Corner-5 System Example and Benchmark”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is my twelfth article based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” an
instructional DVD series I recently created with past BD columnist and good friend Tom Ross.
VEPS contains 750 shot types within 50 main categories and 5 major areas. An outline of the
entire VEPS series and video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-
billiards.com/veps.

    Last month, I introduced the Corner-5 System that is used to aim two-, three-, and four-rail
kicks off a long rail. The Corner-5 system is covered in detail on “VEPS IV - Banks, Kicks, and
Advanced Shots.” If you don’t remember the details of the Corner-5 system, please review last
month’s article and NV B.85. To summarize, for a rolling cue ball (CB) with running English, the
Corner-5 system predicts a third-rail target (T) from the CB’s origination-direction number (D) and
the first-rail number (F) using the following simple formula: T = D – F. Last month, we saw
examples of how to use this system to aim two- and three-rail kick shots in different game
situations. This month, we’ll look at an additional example and then discuss an important
benchmark shot for the system.

    Our example is illustrated in Diagram 1. With this layout, we don’t have a direct shot at the
3-ball, but the 9-ball hanger offers us a carom opportunity. Here, we can use the Corner-5
system to aim a two-rail kick to the bottom side of the 3-ball to deflect the CB into the 9-ball. This
shot isn’t easy, especially if you haven’t practiced with the system; but a good hit results in a win.
The first step to aim this shot is to visualize the desired ghost-ball position against the 3-ball. We
                                                                nd
then need to visualize the angle the CB will come off the 2 rail. As we saw last month, if you
don’t have a good feel for judging this angle, 45º is a good estimate for a wide range of Corner-5
System shots. Next, as demonstrated in shot #518 of NV B.85, you align your cue through the
                                                                                                  rd
center of the ghost-ball target along the just-visualized angle to determine the required 3 -rail
number target (T). For this shot, T = 3.2. Now we need to find a track through the CB that takes
                    rd
us to 3.2 on the 3 rail. A good approach is to first locate a whole-number track that passes
                             rd
close to the CB and the 3 -rail target, and make adjustments relative to that. Here, the 5-2-3
track (see the red line in the diagram) will suffice. Then, as described last month, you shift and
pivot the cue slightly to align with the CB, and adjust as necessary such that the CB origination-
                                                                             rd
direction-number (D) minus the 1st-rail number (F) yields the desired 3 -rail target (D – F = T =
3.2). For this shot, shooting from 5.1 to 1.9 yields the desired CB track (5.1 – 1.9 = 3.2). All of
these steps are demonstrated in shot #523 on VEPS IV - Banks, Kicks, and Advanced Shots.

Billiards Digest                                                                        December, 2010
          CB Originating Direction (D)
                         4.5            4       3.5          3   3.2

       5.1     5          7             6        5           4         3   2           1

                                            Third Rail Number (T)                                    9

                               5-to-2                                           assumed
                                                                               direction off
          6                                                                      2nd rail
                                                                                         45º
                                                     4
          7          rolling CB
                    with running
                                                         6

                      English                                    8                             3

          8                       T=D-F
                               3.2 = 5.1 - 1.9

                           7            6        5           4         3   2           1
                                              First Rail Number (F)        1.9

                               Diagram 1 Corner-5 two-rail kick billiard

    Diagram 2 illustrates an important benchmark for using the Corner-5 system for three- and
four-rail kick shots. It consists of a three-rail kick from the corner pocket to the cross-corner
pocket on the same short rail. For a billiard table that plays “on system,” the 5-to-3 track (D=5,
F=3) goes through 2 on the third rail (T = 5 – 3 = 2) and proceeds to the target corner pocket, per
the blue path. On most pool tables, however, a track closer to 5-to-2 heads to the same corner
                                                                                                rd
pocket off the third rail (see shot #519 in NV B.85). It is useful to know which particular 3 -rail
target results in a path to the corner on the table you happen to be playing on. On my table, the
                                                                                                rd
target is 3 (5 – 2 = 3), but on yours it might be different (e.g., 3.2). To find the benchmark 3 -rail
target on your table, start with the 5-to-2 track and make adjustments, if necessary, from there. If
                                                                                  st
the CB comes up short of the pocket (on the long-rail side), decrease the 1 -rail number a little;
                                                                      st
and if the CB goes long (on the short-rail side), increase the 1 -rail number. Even though the
               rd
path off the 3 rail will vary with the type of table and conditions, the Corner-5 System formula
should still be fairly accurate and consistent. For example, in Diagram 2, even though the two
tracks to the corner are quite different, the formula still holds for both: 5-3=2 and 5-2=3. Again,
                                                            rd
the system generally does a good job of predicting the 3 -rail target.

Billiards Digest                                                                                   December, 2010
                      4.5         4       3.5        3
            5          7          6        5         4         3            2         1

                                      3=5-2
        6

        7                                                      typical
                                                           billiard-table
                                                         benchmark track
        8                                                                           typical
                                                                                   pool-table
                                                                                benchmark track

                        7         6        5         4         3            2         1

                         Diagram 2 Corner-5 System benchmark track

    Knowing which 3rd-rail diamond sends the CB to the corner pocket allows us to target the
corner pocket from different positions on the table. As shown in Diagram 3, the tracks from 6 to
3 (6 – 3 = 3), 5 to 2 (5 – 2 = 3), 4.5 to 1.5 (4.5 – 1.5 = 3), and 4 to 1 (4 – 1 = 3) all go through our
benchmark reference (3) on the 3rd rail and continue to the corner pocket. These tracks and
several related examples are demonstrated in shots #520 and #522 of NV B.85. Again, any track
               rd
through our 3 -rail reference is predicted to head to the corner.

Billiards Digest                                                                             December, 2010
                         4.5         4   3.5       3
            5              7         6    5        4        3        2        1

                     4.5 - 1.5 = 3        4-1=3

        6            5-2=3

        7            6-3=3

        8

                           7         6    5        4        3        2        1

                                                                      rd
                   Diagram 3 Tracks to the corner from benchmark 3 -rail number

     Now that we know how to get to the corner pocket, let’s look at how we can execute shifts
relative to the benchmark to target balls on either side of it. For example, to pocket the 2-ball in
                                                                  rd
Diagram 4, while shooting from 5, we need to decrease the 3 -rail number by one to send the
                                                                                              st
CB one diamond short of the pocket. This is accomplished simply by increasing the 1 -rail
number by one, relative to our benchmark. That is, our 3rd rail target is now 2, thus we aim at 3
         st                                                                        rd
on the 1 rail (5 – 3 = 2). To pocket the 4-ball instead, we need to increase the 3 -rail number by
                                                                                                  st
one to send the CB one diamond long of the pocket. This is accomplished by decreasing the 1 -
                                                                                st
rail number by one, relative to our benchmark. Therefore, we aim at 1 on the 1 rail to target 4 on
      rd
the 3 rail (5 – 1 = 4). Both of these shots are demonstrated in shot #521 of NV B.85.

Billiards Digest                                                                      December, 2010
                             4.5        4       3.5        3
                5              7        6         5        4        3         2        1

                                              4=5-1                                    2=5-3

          6

          7

                      4
          8

                                  2

                              7         6        5         4        3         2        1

                           Diagram 4 Shift relative to Corner-5 benchmark track

    Example shots from the fourth VEPS DVD, including the ones discussed in this article, can
be viewed on the VEPS website or at billiards.colostate.edu under NV B.81 through NV B.86.
                      NV B.81 – Bank and kick shot terminology and basics, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.82 – Rolling-cue-ball through-diamond kick-shot aiming system, from
                      VEPS IV
                      NV B.83 – Shallow-angle contact-point-mirror-image kick-shot aiming system,
normal video
                      from VEPS IV
                      NV B.84 – Plus System for aiming two-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.85 – Corner-Five System for aiming three-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.86 – Cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT), from VEPS IV

    I hope you are enjoying and benefiting from my series of articles featuring shots from the
“Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS).” Have you been practicing the Corner-5 System? If
so, you may have noticed that the system does not work equally well over a full range of CB
positions and shot angles. Next month, we’ll look at how to improve the effectiveness of the
system.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, ball-hit
               fraction, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
               come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
               glossary on my website.

Billiards Digest                                                                               December, 2010
     •    I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help
          find errors and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts.
          Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD:
“High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                      December, 2010
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veps_gems_part_xiii_corner_5_system_adjustments.pdf
title: VEPS GEMS - Part XIII: Corner-5 System Adjustments
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“VEPS GEMS - Part XIII: Corner-5 System Adjustments”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is my thirteenth article based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” an
instructional DVD series I recently created with past BD columnist and good friend Tom Ross.
VEPS contains 750 shot types and principles within 50 main categories and 5 major areas. An
outline of the entire VEPS series and video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-
dave-billiards.com/veps.

    In the last few months, we’ve looked at examples of the Corner-5 System, which is used to
aim two-, three-, and four-rail kicks off a long rail. The system is covered in detail on “VEPS IV -
Banks, Kicks, and Advanced Shots.” If you don’t remember the details of the system, please
review my recent articles and NV B.85. To summarize, for a rolling cue ball (CB) with running
English, the Corner-5 system predicts a third-rail target (T) from the CB’s origination-direction
number (D) and the first-rail number (F) using the following simple formula: T = D – F. If you
have been practicing the Corner-5 System, you may have noticed that the system does not work
equally well over a full range of CB positions and shot angles. This month, we’ll look at several
important effects, and learn when and how to make adjustments.

     As with any kick or bank system, it is important to understand the effects of speed and
English. Diagram 1 illustrates how speed alone affects Corner-5 System tracks. (Just a
                                                             rd
reminder, per last month’s article, the benchmark-shot 3 -rail target might be different on your
table.) First note that speed doesn’t really have much effect on the CB’s target diamond on the
  rd
3 rail. With all three speeds shown in the diagram, the CB heads very close to diamond 3 on
      rd
the 3 rail, just as the Corner-5 system predicts (3 = 5 – 2). This is because the speed-related
                                    nd                                                  st
effects on rebound-angle off the 2 rail tend to counteract the same effects off the 1 rail. This is
                                          rd
not true, however, for the track off the 3 rail, which is affected significantly by speed. As shown
                                                                                 th
in the diagram, slower speed tends to make the CB come up short of the 4 -rail target (see the
blue path), while faster speed tends to make it go long (see the red path). The main reason for
                                                                   rd                                st
this is the amount of sidespin that remains on the CB into the 3 rail. With slower speed, the 1
       nd
and 2 rails do not reinforce the sidespin as much, and more of it wears off by the time it reaches
      rd
the 3 rail. This effect will obviously vary with conditions. Clean balls on slick cloth tend to retain
sidespin longer than dirty balls on sticky cloth.

Billiards Digest                                                                          January, 2011
                      4.5        4      3.5         3
            5          7         6       5          4        3        2        1

                                     3=5-2
        6

        7
                    long                                                  faster
                                                        benchmark
        8                                                 speed
                                                                               slower
                                short

                       7         6        5         4        3        2        1

                            Diagram 1 Corner-5 System speed effects

      Diagram 2 illustrates English effects. As with speed variations, different amounts of English
                             rd                                                       nd
have little effect on the 3 rail target. Again, the effect on rebound-angle off the 2 rail tends to
                                        st                                                         st
counteract the same effect off the 1 rail. With less English, the CB rebounds shorter off the 1
                                                    nd
rail, resulting in a shallower approach in to the 2 rail. The CB picks up some running sidespin
           st
off the 1 rail, but the amount is still less than what it would have if there were more English into
        st
the 1 rail. With less sidespin, the CB then rebounds shorter off the 2nd rail, redirecting it toward
                    rd-                                      nd
the benchmark 3 rail target. The resulting angle off the 2 rail, however, tends to send the CB a
                      rd
little long off the 3 rail (see the red path). With more English, even though the CB tends to head
             rd
into the 3 rail at a slightly steeper angle, the amount of sidespin will be greater, sending the CB
even longer than in the less-English case (see the blue path). Again, as with speed, the degree
of these effects depends on table conditions.

Billiards Digest                                                                         January, 2011
                          4.5       4      3.5      3
            5              7        6       5       4         3       2          1

                                        3=5-2
        6

                                                                          less
        7
                      longer
                                                         benchmark
        8          long
                                                          English
                                                                                     more

                           7        6       5       4         3       2          1

                               Diagram 2 Corner-5 System English effects

   Both Diagrams 1 and 2 illustrate the robustness the Corner-5 System. With a wide range of
                                                  rd
speeds and English, the formula predicts the 3 rail target fairly reliably. However, to target a
                        rd
pocket or ball off the 3 rail, speed and English effects must be considered.
                                                        th
     When using the Corner-5 System to aim at 4 -rail targets, you need to be aware of how
tracks change as the origination-direction number moves away from the benchmark value (5). As
shown in Diagram 3, for CB positions farther down the long rail (i.e., as the origination number
                                                                rd
decreases from 5), the CB tends to go a little short of the 4 -rail target. Therefore, you need to
                                                     st
compensate to go a little longer by shifting your 1 -rail aim point a little down table (i.e., reduce
       st
the 1 -rail number slightly). The smaller the origination number, the more the adjustment. This is
illustrated in the diagram by the dotted tracks in black, red, and blue, corresponding to origination
numbers of 5, 4, and 3.5. The benchmark track (black) leads to the corner, but the track from 4,
comes up a little short of the pocket, and the track from 3.5 comes up even shorter. For the shot
shown in blue, the aim is adjusted about a third of a diamond. You can develop a feel for how
much to shift on different tables through practice. Speed and the amount of English can also be
adjusted, per Diagrams 1 and 2. Some systems have also been suggested that calculate a
correction (e.g., the “Seattle Kid allowance” presented in Byrne’s “New Standard Book of Pool
and Billiards”).

Billiards Digest                                                                            January, 2011
                           4.5        4     3.5      3
            5               7         6      5       4       3          2       1

                                                         3.5 - .5 = 3
        6                                 4-1=3

                                5-2=3
        7

        8

                            7         6      5       4       3          2       1

                                 th
                   Diagram 3 4 -rail track adjustment for smaller origination numbers

     Diagram 4 shows what happens in the other direction. For CB positions farther down the
short rail (i.e., as the origination number increases from 5), the CB tends to go a little long of the
 th                                                                                              st
4 -rail target. Therefore, you need to adjust by aiming to go a little shorter by shifting the 1 -rail
                                                    st
aim point a little up table (i.e., increase the 1 -rail number slightly). The farther from the
benchmark, the more the adjustment. This is illustrated in the diagram with the dotted tracks in
black, red, and blue, corresponding to origination numbers of 5, 6, and 7. The benchmark track
(black) heads to the corner, but the track from 6 goes a little long of the pocket, and the track from
7 goes even longer. For the shot shown in blue, the aim is adjusted about a third of a diamond
                   st
farther up the 1 rail.

Billiards Digest                                                                          January, 2011
                              4.5        4       3.5        3
                 5              7        6         5         4        3        2         1

                              5-2=3

           6             6-3=3

           7              7-4=3

           8

                                7        6         5        4         3        2        1

                                    th
                     Diagram 4 4 -rail track adjustment for larger origination numbers

     Example shots from the fourth VEPS DVD can be viewed on the VEPS website or at
billiards.colostate.edu under NV B.81 through NV B.86.
                      NV B.81 – Bank and kick shot terminology and basics, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.82 – Rolling-cue-ball through-diamond kick-shot aiming system, from
                      VEPS IV
                      NV B.83 – Shallow-angle contact-point-mirror-image kick-shot aiming system,
normal video
                      from VEPS IV
                      NV B.84 – Plus System for aiming two-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.85 – Corner-Five System for aiming three-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.86 – Cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT), from VEPS IV

    I hope you are enjoying and benefiting from my series of articles featuring shots from the
“Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS).” Next month, we’ll take a look at a non-math-based
“spot-on-the-wall” kicking system and see how it is related to the Plus and Corner-5 Systems.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        I want to thank Dave Gross (previously ranked three-cushion-billiard player, and a top
               regional pool player). He provided some good insight and recommendations related to
               the information in this article.
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, ball-hit
               fraction, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
               come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
               glossary on my website.

Billiards Digest                                                                                 January, 2011
     •    I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help
          find errors and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts.
          Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD:
“High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                        January, 2011
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veps_gems_part_xiv_spot_on_the_wall_system.pdf
title: VEPS GEMS - Part XIV: 'Spot-on-the-Wall' System
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“VEPS GEMS - Part XIV: ‘Spot-on-the-Wall’ System”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is my fourteenth article based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),”
an instructional DVD series I recently created with past BD columnist and good friend Tom Ross.
VEPS contains 750 shot types and principles within 50 main categories and 5 major areas. An
outline of the entire VEPS series and video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-
dave-billiards.com/veps.

     In the last six articles, we’ve looked at various systems for aiming one-rail, two-rail, and three-
rail kick shots. These systems included the rolling cue-ball (CB), through-diamond mirror system,
the Plus System, and the Corner-5 System. This month, we’ll look at a visual, non-formula-based
alternative to these systems called the “spot-on-the-wall” system, and show how, why, and when
it works. The system allows you to determine the line of aim to kick one, two, or three rails to a
corner pocket (or other target). No arithmetic or diamond numbers are needed, although the
system does require familiarity with a given table and its surrounding. The “spot-on-the-wall”
system is demonstrated with numerous examples in NV B.35 and in Shot # 524 of “VEPS IV -
Banks, Kicks, and Advanced Shots.”

                   NV B.35 – Corner-5, Plus-2, and one-rail kicks, and "spot-on-the-wall" aiming,
normal video
                   with Tom Ross

      Diagram 1 shows an example of how to use the system to aim three-rail kick shots to a
corner pocket. The first step is to find a track to the corner pocket for any “benchmark” shot (see
Diagram 1a). That is, select and mark some arbitrary CB position and then vary your aim into the
first rail until you find one that sends the CB to the corner pocket. As with most multiple-rail kick
systems, use running English with a rolling CB. After determining the benchmark aim line, note
where it points on a nearby wall and place an identifying mark on the wall if necessary (e.g., with
a Post-It Note or piece of tape). If there is no wall close to the table, just find the nearest
landmark such as another table, a statue, a column, something hanging from the ceiling, or
anything else that doesn’t move. As we will see, depending on the number of rail cushions
contacted, it helps to have the spot a certain distance from the table; however, the system will still
work fairly well even if the distance is not perfect. Now, as indicated by Diagrams 1b and 1c, the
remarkable and beneficial aspect of the system is that shooting at the identified wall spot from
almost any CB position, into the same rail, will send the CB to the corner pocket. In the
remainder of this article, we will use the systems we have examined in recent months to
determine the best spot distances to use for each type of kick.

Billiards Digest                                                                          February, 2011
                        Diagram 1 “Spot-on-the-wall” example at the table

     Diagram 2 shows various three-rail tracks to the corner pocket based on the Corner-5
System. If you would like to review this system, please watch NV B.85 or refer back to my
November ’10 article. Shown in the diagram are three different spots where aiming lines for the
different tracks intersect. As you’ve probably figured out by now, for the “spot-on-the-wall”
system to work perfectly, all of these lines would need to intersect at a single point. Also, ideally,
a room landmark (e.g., a wall) would be available at this exact location for identifying or marking a
spot. Unfortunately, the lines don’t all intersect at the same point, and there might not always be
a landmark at the desired distance. However, if you pick a wall spot (or other room landmark)
that is 0.75 to 1.5 table widths beyond the first rail, all of the required aiming lines will point fairly
close to the spot. As a consequence, when kicking at the spot off the long rail from any direction,
the CB will rebound off three rails and come fairly close to the corner pocket.

                   NV B.85 – Corner-Five System for aiming three-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
normal video

Billiards Digest                                                                            February, 2011
               4.5   4     3.5   3
    5           7     6     5    4    3    2     1

6

7

8

                7    6      5    4    3    2     1

                                                                         0.75
                                                                          to
                                                                          1.5
                                                                         table
                                                                         width

                          Diagram 2 Tracks and “spot-on-the-wall” distance for
                                    the three-rail Corner-5 System

     The “spot-on-the-wall” system can also be applied to two-rail and one-rail kicks. Diagram 3
shows various two-rail tracks to the corner pocket based on the Plus System. If you wish to
review the basics of this system, please watch NV B.84 or refer back to my August ’10 article. As
with the previous example, the diagram shows three different spots where the aiming lines for the
different tracks intersect. Again, while the aiming lines don’t all meet at a single point, they do
converge fairly closely near the points shown. Therefore, for two-rail kicks, the best distance to
place the wall spot appears to be about 1 to 1.5 table lengths beyond the first rail. With the spot
in this range, kicks aimed at the spot off the short rail will head very close to the corner pocket.

                     NV B.84 – Plus System for aiming two-rail kick shots, from VEPS IV
normal video

Billiards Digest                                                                          February, 2011
                                                 1 to 1.5 table lengths

                                          1
                                          2
                                           3
                                          4
                                          5
                                          6
                                          7

                       Diagram 3 Tracks and “spot-on-the-wall” distance for
                                    the two-rail Plus System

    Diagram 4 illustrates various corner pocket tracks for the one-rail, rolling-CB, through-
diamond mirror system described in my June ‘10 article and demonstrated in NV B.82. With this
system, the track aim lines shown do in fact come very close to converging at a single point.
Therefore, with one-rail kicks, you should expect the “spot-on-the-wall” system to be fairly
accurate and consistent, provided the spot is about 1 table width beyond the rail.

                   NV B.82 – Rolling-cue-ball through-diamond kick-shot aiming system, from
normal video
                   VEPS IV

Billiards Digest                                                                      February, 2011
                                                                                       about
                                                                                       1 table
                                                                                        width

                                                   4-to-2              2-to-1
                                        5-to-2.5            3-to-1.5

                    Diagram 4 Tracks and “spot-on-the-wall” distance for
                   the one-rail, rolling-CB, through-diamond mirror system

     Whenever I’ve seen the “spot-on-the-wall” system described in books or videos (even in NV
B.35, which I filmed with Tom Ross), I’ve been disappointed by the lack of logical information
concerning how far the spot on the wall should be from the table. Some people recommend “the
farther the better,” or “imagine flipping the table to create mirror images, with one flip for each
cushion contact.” None of this ever really made sense to me, and that’s why I used the well-
known kicking systems to try to come up with more meaningful and effective advice. Hopefully,
the diagrams in this article will help you do a better job at picking a location on a wall or other
room landmark. If you play on the same table often, and if you’ve done your homework, you
won’t need a bunch of arithmetic or guesswork to decide where to aim. Just aim at the spot!

    I hope you are enjoying and benefiting from my series of articles featuring shots and gems
from the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS).” Example shots from the fourth VEPS DVD
can be viewed on the VEPS website or at billiards.colostate.edu under NV B.81 through NV
B.86. Next month, we’ll start taking a look at some advanced shot techniques presented on Disc
V – Skill and Specialty Shots.

Billiards Digest                                                                      February, 2011
                      NV B.81 – Bank and kick shot terminology and basics, from VEPS IV
                      NV B.83 – Shallow-angle contact-point-mirror-image kick-shot aiming system,
normal video
                      from VEPS IV
                      NV B.86 – Cut-induced throw (CIT) and spin-induced throw (SIT), from VEPS IV

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, ball-hit
               fraction, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
               come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
               glossary on my website.
      •        I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help
               find errors and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts.
               Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD:
“High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                February, 2011
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veps_gems_part_xv_the_jump_shot.pdf
title: VEPS GEMS - Part XV: The Jump Shot
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“VEPS GEMS - Part XV: The Jump Shot”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is my fifteenth article based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” an
instructional DVD series I recently created with past BD columnist and good friend Tom Ross.
VEPS contains 750 shot types and principles within 50 main categories and 5 major areas. An
outline of the entire VEPS series and video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-
dave-billiards.com/veps. In recent months, we’ve looked at various systems for aiming one-rail,
two-rail, and three-rail kick shots, all from the fourth DVD: “VEPS IV - Banks, Kicks, and
Advanced Shots.” Over the next few months, we’ll look at selected shots and techniques from
the last DVD: “VEPS V – Skill and Specialty Shots.”

    This month, let’s look at the jump shot, a very important tool/weapon in the arsenal of a
competitive pool player. A jump shot is sometimes required when you leave yourself hooked or
when your opponent accomplishes the same with a safety. With some cue ball (CB) positions, a
kick or masse shot might also be possible or desirable, but sometimes a jump shot will be the
best option … provided you know how to execute it.

     The following videos on my website offer many examples and advice concerning jump
technique: HSV B.3, B.5, B.8, B.19, and B.37, and NV B.87. To get the most benefit from this
article, I advise you to view these videos before proceeding, especially if you are not very
experienced with jump shots.
                   HSV B.3 - various jump shot techniques
                   HSV B.5 - jump and break shot strokes and grips
                   HSV B.8 - jump shot off the rail
normal video
                   HSV B.19 - highly elevated cue jump shots
                   HSV B.37 - jump shot over-cut effect and examples
                   NV B.87 - Jump shot technique, from VEPS V

    In general, the most basic advice to jump the CB well includes: use a short and light jump cue
with a hard tip, use a relaxed grip, align the cue tip with the CB vertical centerline, and follow the
suggestions in my stroke best stroke practices document (available in the “Instructor and Student
Resources” section of my website under “summaries and handouts“). Also, as described and
demonstrated in NV B.87, you should be aware of the following elements of good technique:

     1. Make sure your bridge is as high and stable as possible, while remaining comfortable.
        The goal here is to have your stroke length be as long as possible within the limits of the
        elevated bridge. A longer bridge allows you to accelerate gradually and smoothly in
        producing the cue speed required for good jump action.

     2. Bend your bridge arm elbow to get your upper body down and your grip arm up (with a
        standard stroke jump shot).

Billiards Digest                                                                           March, 2011
     3. To jump the CB more vertically and have it land sooner, elevate the cue more, as
        illustrated in Diagram 1. However, be aware that the shot becomes more difficult as the
        elevation increases.

     4. To jump the CB longer and higher, with a given cue elevation, use more speed (see
        Diagram 2).

     5. As illustrated in Diagram 3, for the best jumping action, aim between center-ball (from
        the perspective of looking down the cue) and the resting point of the CB on the cloth.
        Aim lower when draw is needed or when the cue is elevated more (to reduce the risk of
        jamming the ball between the tip and slate).

                              a.) less cue elevation for lower, longer jump

                             b.) more cue elevation for higher, shorter jump

                         Diagram 1 Jump shot cue elevation effects

                               fast
                               medium
                               slow

                                 a.) less speed for lower, shorter jump

                               fast
                               medium
                               slow

                                b.) more speed for higher, longer jump

                             Diagram 2 Jump shot speed effects

Billiards Digest                                                                     March, 2011
                                                                  center-ball

                                                                  resting point

                    Diagram 3 Recommended tip position range for jump shots

    Some people, for some or even all jump shots, prefer a dart stroke, which uses an overhand
grip and a “dart-throwing” motion instead of the standard underhand-grip and pendulum-like
stroking motion. The dart stroke is especially useful if you need to reach directly in front of you or
when using high cue elevation for a close-range or short-landing jump. Both stroke types are
demonstrated in NV B.87.

    Probably the most critical aspect of jump technique is to keep the grip as light as possible
during the entire stroke. The jump stroke should be more of a throwing motion rather than a
pushing one. This allows the cue to rebound and not trap the CB. However, don’t be afraid to
accelerate into the ball. Many people have a tendency to jab at the CB because they are worried
about driving the cue into the table and possibly damaging the cloth. With a light grip, and
particularly with a light jump cue, the impact with the CB will slow the cue significantly, and no
damage will occur, even at fast cue speeds. Strive for a light, smooth, and accelerating motion;
and as with all shots, keep your body, head, and bridge hand as still and stable as possible
during the entire stroke. NV B.87 has some additional advice on how to aim and stroke different
types of jump shots. Also, Shot #’s 616-630 on Disc V of VEPS provide many examples showing
when and how jump shots are used in different game situations.

    It also helps some players to focus on the CB instead of the object ball during the final stroke.
This is because the tip contact point is so critical with a jump shot, both to enable jumping action
and to prevent or limit CB swerve. When you are first learning, you will probably have more
success by focusing on the CB contact point. Whichever method you choose, make sure you
have intense and still focus during the final stroke. This, of course, is good advice for any shot.

    For more information, advice, and demonstrations concerning the jump shot, see the “jump
shot” FAQ page on my website.

    I hope you are enjoying and benefiting from my series of articles featuring shots and gems
from the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS).” Example shots from the fifth VEPS DVD
can be viewed on the VEPS website or at billiards.colostate.edu under NV B.87 through NV
B.93. Next month, we’ll look at masse shot technique and examples.
                   NV B.87 - Jump shot technique, from VEPS V
                   NV B.88 - Masse shot technique, from VEPS V
                   NV B.89 - 9-ball racking strategy, from VEPS V
                   NV B.90 - 8-ball and 9-ball run-out examples, from VEPS V
normal video       NV B.91 - Frozen-throw-down-rail proposition shot, from VEPS V
                   NV B.92 - "Impossible" cut shots, from VEPS V
                   NV B.93 - Famous trick (artistic pool) shots, from VEPS V

Billiards Digest                                                                           March, 2011
Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, ball-hit
          fraction, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
          come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
          glossary on my website.
      •   I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help
          find errors and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts.
          Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD:
“High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                              March, 2011
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veps_gems_part_xvi_the_masse_shot.pdf
title: VEPS GEMS - Part XVI: The Massé Shot
topics: technical_proofs, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, strategy_rules_drills, history_and_general_physics
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“VEPS GEMS - Part XVI: The Massé Shot”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and
technical proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the
resources on the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you
might want to view the resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online
at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is my sixteenth article based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS),” an
instructional DVD series I recently created with past BD columnist and good friend Tom Ross.
VEPS contains 750 shot types and principles within 50 main categories and 5 major areas. An
outline of the entire VEPS series and video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-
dave-billiards.com/veps. Last month, we looked at jump shot physics and technique advice,
which is covered on the fifth DVD: “VEPS V – Skill and Specialty Shots.” This month, we’ll focus
on massé shot technique and examples, also covered on the last DVD.

     A massé shot is one where you hit down on the cue ball (CB) off center to curve the CB’s
path, usually in dramatic fashion. In the early 1800’s, a brilliant physicist and mathematician
came up with a remarkably simple way to predict the direction of the CB after curving ceases and
natural roll begins. His name was Gustave Coriolis, the same guy who discovered the “Coriolis”
Effect that helps explains, for instance, how tornados and hurricanes develop. Diagram 1
illustrates Coriolis’ aiming system. The line of action of the cue results in contact on the CB at
point “B.” Extending this line down onto the table defines aim point “A” on the cloth. Finally, point
“R” is the resting point of the CB on the cloth. Coriolis discovered that the final direction of the
CB, after curving, should theoretically be parallel to the line through points “R” and “A.” I call this
system the “BAR” method because contact point “B” on the ball results in aim point “A” on the
cloth, and the line from resting point “R” predicts the final CB direction.

     As demonstrated in NV B.88, the system isn’t usually perfect in the “real world.” With typical
conditions, the curve will usually come up a little short of the predicted direction. Therefore, you
generally need to aim for a little more curve than indicated by the method. In Diagram 1, for
example, if you want the CB to curve to the direction indicated by the red line, you need to aim for
a slightly larger theoretical CB curve, indicated by the blue line. Even though the system isn’t
perfect, and the results will vary with conditions, it nevertheless provides an excellent reference
from which to adjust. If you want to develop a “feel” for aiming massé shots, Coriolis’ system is a
good place to start.

Billiards Digest                                                                             April, 2011
                                       aiming
                                         line

                                                                                                   fast
                                                                                                   medium
              contact point
             on the cue ball                                                                       slow
                                               resting point
                   (B)                        of the cue ball
                                               on the table                     actual direction
                                                    (R)                                                     A R
                                                                                  with typical               B
                                                                                  conditions
        aiming point
      on the table cloth                                                                    theoretical
              (A)
                                                                                          final direction
                                                                                            of cue ball
                                                                                        (in RA direction)

                               a) side view                                                b) top view

                           Diagram 1 Coriolis massé shot aiming method

     As shown in Diagram 2, shot speed is a controlling factor in the path the CB follows. With
more speed, the CB’s curve takes longer, sending it farther down the table before reaching the
final direction predicted by the “BAR” method. However, according to the "BAR" system, the final
direction is the same at all speeds (i.e., all of the CB paths are parallel to each other after
curving). With greater cue elevation and more curve, more shot speed is required to get beyond
and around obstacle balls that are the same distance from the CB.

                                                                          R A
                                                                          B

                               elevated cue
                                                       too
                                                       fast

                                                               just
                                                              right
                                 5                                        9
                                                                                3
                                       2         too
                                                slow
                                                                      4             1

                                Diagram 2 Massé shot speed effects

Billiards Digest                                                                                              April, 2011
     Diagram 3 (similar to VEPS Shot #’s 631 and 632) shows a situation where we need only a
small amount of curve. The goal is to curve the CB just enough to get past the 11-ball to pocket
the 8-ball. A jump shot is an option here, but if the CB hits the 8-ball while airborne (e.g., after
bouncing), we risk jumping the CB off the table for a foul. Also, all reasonable kick shot paths are
blocked by the 12-ball and 13-ball. A swerve shot (slight massé) is probably the best option here,
especially if you are not a very skilled jumper. Only a modest amount of cue elevation and
bottom-right English is needed to swerve the CB around the 11-ball for the win. Our line of aim
should be well outside of the 11-ball (as shown in the diagram) to give the CB room to clear the
11-ball as it curves. Notice how the aim point (“A”) on the cloth is well in front of the CB to create
the desired “RA” line direction. As indicated above, shot speed is important as well. If hit too
softly, the CB will curve early and possibly contact the 11-ball. With too much speed, it will curve
too late and go long of the target.

                   elevated cue                  R   A
                          fast               B
                          medium
                          slow

                                        13
                                   12                                aiming line

                                                         11

                                                                                      8

                           Diagram 3 Example small-curve swerve shot

     Diagram 4 (VEPS Shot #634) shows an example where a larger-curve massé shot is
required. Again, all reasonable kick shot paths are blocked, and the 11-ball and 12-ball take
away the jump shot option. As with any swerve or massé shot, a good first aiming step is to
visualize the desired final direction (after the CB curves). Then visualize a line through the
resting point of the CB at a slightly bigger angle than this (line “RA”). Then determine the
required aiming line of the shot. Here, we need to aim to get past the 11-ball. Where the vertical
plane through the aiming line intersects line “RA” defines aim point “A” on the cloth. Now all that
remains is choosing a comfortable cue elevation and tip-contact point on the CB that targets aim
point “A.”

      For a given cue vertical-plane direction (i.e., aiming line) and desired final curve direction
(defined by line “RA”), there is a range of cue elevations and tip contact points on the CB that
target the necessary aiming point (“A”) on the cloth. As a general rule, it is advisable to use as
little elevation as necessary. With higher elevation, there is a greater risk of jamming the CB into
the table. At the same time, however, there must be enough elevation to avoid a miscue caused
by aiming too low on the CB. You should experiment by varying the cue elevation and tip position
(and shot speed) for a given aim point on the cloth to help develop a feel for these effects.

Billiards Digest                                                                            April, 2011
    Obviously, massé shots like the one in Diagram 4 require a fair amount of practice to develop
a feel for the speed required. Also, depending on conditions, you might need to adjust the “RA”
direction line more at higher cue elevations to compensate for the non-ideal characteristics of the
system.

                                                            11                           12    8
                                                  14
                                                       13

                                                                                         final
                             elevated cue
                                                                                      direction
                                                                  aiming
                                    fast                            line               angle
                                    medium
                                    slow
                                               “RA” line at slightly
                                                larger angle than
                                                final direction line
                                   B       A
                                       R
                                               vertical plane of cue (aiming line direction)

                            Diagram 4 Example large-curve massé shot

    Now let’s discuss equipment and technique. Generally, a regular playing cue is suitable for
massé shots; however, some people might prefer a shorter cue (but with more weight than a
jump cue). You also need a good tip that holds chalk well and grabs the CB. You definitely do
not want to use a phenolic tip, typically found on jump and break cues. It goes without saying that
regardless of the type of cue, it must be supported by a stable bridge. To this end, when
possible, brace one leg against the table or up on the rail or playing surface. Additional stability
can be realized by bracing the bridge hand against the body or raised leg. For more speed, use a
longer bridge length so you can accelerate smoothly during the forward stroke. Finally, don’t be
afraid to follow through into the table. All of this technique advice is demonstrated in NV B.88,
and additional advice and examples can be found in NV B.41 and NV B.42. For more information
and resources, see “massé shot” in the FAQ section of my website.

    I hope you are enjoying and benefiting from my series of articles featuring shots and gems
from the “Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS).” Example shots from the fifth VEPS DVD
can be viewed on the VEPS website or at billiards.colostate.edu under NV B.87 through NV
B.93. Next month, we’ll look at some classic proposition shots.
                   NV B.41 - Coriolis masse shot aiming method with a large-curve example
                   NV B.42 - Coriolis masse shot aiming method small-curve example
                   NV B.87 - Jump shot technique, from VEPS V
                   NV B.88 - Massé shot technique, from VEPS V
                   NV B.89 - 9-ball racking strategy, from VEPS V
normal video       NV B.90 - 8-ball and 9-ball run-out examples, from VEPS V
                   NV B.91 - Frozen-throw-down-rail proposition shot, from VEPS V
                   NV B.92 - "Impossible" cut shots, from VEPS V
                   NV B.93 - Famous trick (artistic pool) shots, from VEPS V

Billiards Digest                                                                                   April, 2011
Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •   I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, ball-hit
          fraction, etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever
          come across a word or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online
          glossary on my website.
      •   I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help
          find errors and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts.
          Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool
and Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD:
“High-speed Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                               April, 2011
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/veps_gems_part_xvii_trick_and_proposition_shots.pdf
title: VEPS GEMS - Part XVII: Trick and Proposition Shots
topics: collisions_and_impacts, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
David Alciatore, PhD (“Dr. Dave”)              ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
“VEPS GEMS - Part XVII: Trick and Proposition Shots”

Note: Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, and technical
proofs (TP), and all of my past articles, can be accessed and viewed online at
billiards.colostate.edu. The reference numbers used in the article help you locate the resources on
the website. If you have a slow or inconvenient Internet connection, you might want to view the
resources from a CD-ROM or DVD. Details can be found online at: dr-dave-billiards.com.

     This is my seventeenth and final article in a series based on the “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool
Shots (VEPS),” an instructional 5-DVD set I recently created with past BD columnist and good friend Tom
Ross. VEPS contains 750 shot types and principles within 50 main categories and 5 major areas. An outline
of the entire VEPS series and video excerpts from each DVD can be viewed online at: dr-dave-
billiards.com/veps. This article features proposition and trick shots from the last DVD: “VEPS V – Skill and
Specialty Shots.”

     Diagram 1 shows the setup for a classic proposition shot involving cut-induced throw (CIT). All three
object balls are frozen to each other, and the 5-ball and 11-ball are frozen to the cushion. With typical
conditions, hitting the 4-ball into the 11-ball throws the 5-ball into the cushion causing it go wide of the pocket
as shown by the “typical” path in the diagram. NV B.91 demonstrates how this fact can be used to your
advantage as a proposition or joke to play against a gullible or unknowledgeable bystander (AKA “mark”).
Here’s how it’s done: First, being careful to not let the “mark” notice, use a finger to apply some saliva at the
contact point between the 11-ball and 5-ball. Then demonstrate just how easy the shot is. With the secret
spit at the contact point, there will be almost no friction between the balls during the hit, and the 5-ball will
head virtually straight down the rail with little or no throw (see the “w/ spit” path in the diagram). Then,
challenge the “mark” to make the shot. Of course, it won't be exactly the same shot, but that's between you
and me. When you set up the shot for the “mark,” apply a chalk smudge at the contact point. This creates
cling (excessive friction) between the balls during the hit, and the 5-ball will be thrown much more than normal
into the cushion, rebounding well wide of the pocket (see the “w/ chalk” path in the diagram). You may want
to view NV B.91 to see how Tom is able to prepare and switch the balls without the “mark” (me) noticing the
subterfuge. While we were filming, the proposition didn’t go exactly as we had planned, but Tom and I
managed to improvise and pull it off anyway. The key to pulling off the proposition is to make sure the contact
point is wet for the “set up” shot. It can also help to use more speed because there is less CIT at faster
speed, but be aware that faster speed can also cause the ball to rattle out of the pocket.

Billiards Digest                                                                             May, 2011
                                    11 5
                                4
                                                                                       w/ spit
                                                                                        typical

                                                                                    w/ chalk

                                              classic CIT proposition shot

                                    Diagram 1 Classic CIT proposition shot

    In addition to including a variety of proposition shots, VEPS V also features the “Top Ten Most Famous
Trick Shots of All Time,” as selected by me and Tom:
    1. “machine gun” shot
    2. "parting the Red Sea" shot
    3. "jump ball out of the rack" shot
    4. "butterfly" shot
    5. "line of four balls" shot
    6. “passing lane” shot
    7. “over and under the bridge” shot
    8. “Pool Hall Junkies” carom-kick timing shot
    9. “The Hustler” billiard masse
    10. “The Hustler” frozen bank

Shots “4” and “5” are demonstrated in NV B.93, and we’ll look at these in detail. All of the others are
described and demonstrated on VEPS V. As with the proposition shot above, CIT is an important factor in
these “trick” shots.

     Diagram 2 illustrates the classic “butterfly shot.” The goal is to pocket all six balls in each of the six
pockets. To set up the shot, first place a spare ball at the ghost-ball position shown in the diagram, along the
centerline of the table, one diamond above the side pockets. Then freeze the 1-ball and 4-ball to this ball
along lines directly to the side pockets. Firmly set these balls in place by tapping down with another ball.
Then freeze the other four balls so the lines-of-centers point to the short-rail sides of the target pockets. The
exact angles required depend on the conditions of the balls (i.e., the amount they throw). The 3-ball and 6-
ball will need to be aimed farther from the pockets because they are thrown over a larger distance. When the
CB is sent into the cluster, the 1-ball and 4-ball throw the other balls into the corners and then travel down the
tangent lines off the 2-ball and 5-ball into the side pockets. If the balls are set up well, this shot is actually
difficult to miss, even if you don’t split the 1-ball and 4-ball with much accuracy.

Billiards Digest                                                                               May, 2011
                                              5                                    lines-of-centers
                                                  4 6

                                                  1
                       fast                   2       3
                       medium
                       slow

                                         Diagram 2 Butterfly trick shot

     Diagram 3 illustrates the classic "line of four balls" trick shot. This shot is also fairly easy to execute if set
up properly. First, all four balls must be frozen, and the line through their centers should be slightly up table
of the side pocket to compensate for throw of the 4-ball. The cue ball (CB) is aligned between the 3-ball and
4-ball, one diamond up table, although the exact placement isn’t critical. Use a draw shot, aiming to hit the 3-
ball just before the 2-ball. The 3-ball throws the 4-ball into the center of the opposite side pocket. The 3-ball
picks up clockwise spin from the CB cut angle, and this spin is reinforced by the cut on the 4-ball. The 3-ball
heads down table along the tangent line off the 4-ball, and the transferred spin changes the rebound angle off
the end rail for a straight-back bank into the corner pocket. The cut angle and bottom spin help clear the CB
out of the way of the banking 3-ball. After hitting the 3-ball, the bottom spin on the CB also transfers a small
amount of topspin to the 2-ball that helps push it forward of the tangent line. In addition, because the 2-ball is
frozen to the 1-ball and hit at an angle, it will naturally head forward of the tangent line slightly (for more info,
see NV B.56). Finally, the hit on the 2-ball sends the 1-ball into the side pocket. The ball most likely to give
you trouble is the 3-ball. The amount of transferred spin depends on ball conditions and shot speed. If the 3-
ball goes long of the corner (i.e., if it hits the long rail first) use more speed to reduce the amount of spin
transfer. If it comes up short (i.e., if it hits the short rail first), use less speed to create more spin transfer;
although, more sidespin will wear off on the way to the end rail at slower speed. You also need enough
speed to have the 4-ball reach the opposite side pocket. You can also vary the CB position and the amount
of draw to alter the action of the shot if necessary.

Billiards Digest                                                                                 May, 2011
                                                             1
                                                             2
                                                             3                                           3
                                                             4

                                                                                 tangent
                                                                                   line
                                                   fast
                                                   medium
                                                   slow
                                                                                           transferred
                                                                                               spin

                                         line of centers

                                         Diagram 3 Line-of-four-balls trick shot

    I hope you have enjoyed and benefited from my series of articles featuring shots and gems from the
“Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots (VEPS).” Example shots from the fifth VEPS DVD can be viewed on the
VEPS website or at billiards.colostate.edu under NV B.87 through NV B.93.
                      NV B.56 - Bob Jewett's ten-times-fuller frozen-object-ball aiming system
                      NV B.87 - Jump shot technique, from VEPS V
                      NV B.88 - Massé shot technique, from VEPS V
                      NV B.89 - 9-ball racking strategy, from VEPS V
normal video
                      NV B.90 - 8-ball and 9-ball run-out examples, from VEPS V
                      NV B.91 - Frozen-throw-down-rail proposition shot, from VEPS V
                      NV B.92 - "Impossible" cut shots, from VEPS V
                      NV B.93 - Famous trick (artistic pool) shots, from VEPS V

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

PS:
      •        I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology (e.g., squirt, throw, stun, ball-hit fraction,
               etc.), and I know not all readers are totally familiar with these terms. If you ever come across a word
               or phrase you don’t fully understand, please refer to the online glossary on my website.
      •        I want to thank Jim Valasina. He graciously proof-reads my articles every month to help find errors
               and make suggestions. My article quality is better as a result of his efforts. Thanks again Jim!

Dr. Dave is author of the book, DVD, and CD-ROM: “The Illustrated Principles of Pool and
Billiards,” the DVD Series: “The Video Encyclopedia of Pool Shots,” and the DVD: “High-speed
Video Magic.”

Billiards Digest                                                                                   May, 2011
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/walker.pdf
title: Walker
topics: uncategorized
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
[NO_EXTRACTED_TEXT]
===== END DOCUMENT =====
===== BEGIN DOCUMENT =====
path: whitepapers/waxgate_effects.pdf
title: Waxgate Effects
topics: technical_proofs, collisions_and_impacts, cue_ball_motion_and_spin, aiming_and_potting, banks_kicks_rails, strategy_rules_drills
retrieval: include
authority: contextual
excluded_scopes: 
cited_by_repo: no
text:
“WaxGate Effects”                                                               ILLUSTRATED PRINCIPLES
Dr. Dave Alciatore, PhD

Supporting narrated video (NV) demonstrations, high-speed video (HSV) clips, technical proofs (TP),
and all past articles are available online at drdavepoolinfo.com. Reference numbers used in the
articles help you locate the resources on the website.

     If you are a pool fan, you have heard about the recent WaxGate controversy following the July 2025 $1M
World Championship in Saudi Arabia. The topic really blew up on social media in response to a couple of
Facebook posts by Eklent Kaci who claimed some players were purposely putting wax or Silicone on the cue
ball (CB) to make it react in unpredictable ways. This would help the player who applied the wax, since they
would know how to change their play immediately, as opposed to the opponent, who might not adjust as quickly
and might miss shots or positions as a result. At the worldclass level, this could cause loss of the game, match,
and tournament. I won’t be getting into all the social-media drama in this article. Instead, I focus on all the ball
reaction effects that occur under very slick conditions resulting from new cloth and polished balls, whether or
not an extra substance is added to the CB by an unethical player.

               Image 1 Recently online videos dealing with WaxGate and slick-condition effects

     My recent online videos on this topic (NV L.95 and NV L.96) cover some of the WaxGate drama and show
all effects of slick conditions or waxed balls (see the video thumbnail images in Image 1). The effects include:

          1. Draw is much easier since less backspin is lost on the way to the object ball (OB) due to less
             friction between the CB and the cloth.

          2. Sidespin reacts less off cushions. I will cover this in detail below.

          3. Pockets play larger since balls can more easily slide off the pocket points and facings without
             picking up much spin that can cause a ball to rattle out.

          4. The CB persists on the tangent line longer with draw and follow shots at an angle. Because
             there is less friction, the CB peels out and takes longer to curve.

          5. Follow shots stall off rails. I will cover this in detail below.

          6. Rolling kicks and banks go longer since the CB experiences less sideways resistance from the
             cushion due to less friction. Also, more of the topspin remains on the ball after rebound (again due
             to less friction), allowing the ball to curve forward more after rebound.

          7. Balls throw less because there is less friction between the balls.

          8. Kick-and-stick shots react differently. When kicking nearly straight into a rail, normal conditions
             cause a rolling CB to leave with stun resulting in stopping action if an OB is hit full. But with slick

Billiards Digest                                        1                                               October 2025
                   conditions, some of the topspin is retained, acting like backspin after rebound. This can cause the
                   CB to head back to the cushion after hitting an OB.

          9. Shallow-angle follow-shots scratch more easily. Under normal conditions, a follow shot at a
             small angle to a rail causes the CB to bounce away from the rail enough to avoid a scratch. But
             under slick conditions, the retained topspin can send the CB back toward the rail into the pocket.
             Also, as mentioned above, the pocket plays larger under slick conditions, making the scratch even
             more likely.

          10. Massé shots are more impressive. Less friction between the CB and cloth allows the tip to impart
              more spin to the CB as it is driven down into the table, and the CB swings out wider as the spin
              peels out over a larger distance. The extra spin also helps the ball curve more.

          11. 2- and 3-rail kicks with running spin go long since the sidespin doesn’t react much on the first
              rail and the CB swings out more on the way to the 2nd rail.

          12. Jump shots are slightly easier, especially with jump draw. Under typical conditions, because
              there is friction between the CB and cloth, there is resistance to forward motion and not much
              backspin is imparted to the CB. It also wears off quickly with each bounce. Under slick conditions,
              more backspin can be imparted and the backspin doesn't wear off as much during the bounces.

          13. When using sidespin, the CB deflects more.           I will cover this in detail below.

     All these effects are all discussed and demonstrated in detail in the videos, but let’s look at a few in detail
here. Image 2 shows a test shot used to show how sidespin reacts less off cushions. I am shooting straight
across the table with maximum right spin, attempting to pocket the 7. Under normal conditions, I can easily
kick to the 7 from this CB position. Between the first and second videos, I had my rails changed with new cloth
on the cushions, which plays slick. Because there is less friction, the sidespin doesn’t have as much effect. An
untreated CB heads short of the 7 to the white-circle position shown in Image 2. Using the same tip position
and shot speed, a CB waxed with Turtle Wax comes up well short of that (see the green circle). A CB sprayed
and wiped with Silicone comes up even shorter (see the red circle). Silicone lubricant makes the CB even
slicker than wax, causing less sidespin reaction on the cushion.

           Image 2 Maximum sidespin kick results for new cloth, Turtle Wax, and Silicone Spray

Billiards Digest                                           2                                              October 2025
    Image 3 shows a shot I used to demonstrate how follow shots react when the OB is close to a rail. I am
attempting to follow off the 7 to rebound off the foot rail to head up-table for the 8 (under my arm). Under normal
conditions, the CB easily follows the yellow path off the rail. However, with a waxed CB, topspin remains on
the CB after rebound, acting as backspin, causing slowing and stall, as indicated by the red line in the image.
As shown in the video, the stalling action still occurs even with a thinner hit. And at a fuller hit, the effect is even
more dramatic.

                                       Image 3 Follow shot stall off a rail

     When using sidespin under slick conditions, you must aim differently to compensate for changes in CB
deflection. Remember, as shown in Image 4, when you hit the CB off center, in this case on the right, the CB
does not go straight. It squirts off to the left and swerves back to the right some. The resulting aiming-line error
at the OB is called net CB deflection. The amount of squirt depends only on the cue and the amount of sidespin.
But swerve depends on many things, including the condition of the CB and cloth. To compare different
conditions, I aimed the CB straight up-table from the head spot for a square hit on an OB frozen to the center
of the foot rail, without compensating my aim for CB deflection. For a medium-fast shot, using my Predator
Revo with maximum spin, an untreated CB deflects quite a bit, barely clipping the edge of the OB. With a CB
waxed with Turtle Wax, the CB deflects more, missing the OB entirely. With Silicone Spray, the CB deflection
is even larger. Obviously, if you don’t know how to compensate your aim with sidespin shots, you will not be
very effective using sidespin, especially if you play under a variety of conditions.

                                   Image 4 Squirt, swerve, and CB deflection

Billiards Digest                                         3                                                  October 2025
    Be sure to watch online videos NV L.95 and NV L.96. They discuss and demonstrate all the effects in
detail. They also discuss the whole WaxGate saga and offer recommendations for how suspicions and ball
tampering can be avoided in the future. Hopefully, we won’t have any more WaxGate controversies in the
future to distract us from the great play the pros have been showing us lately.

Good luck with your game,
Dr. Dave

                   NV L.95 – Pool’s WAXGATE Controversy and the Effects of Slick Cloth and Waxed Balls
   normal video
                   NV L.96 – More Waxing Effects, Including Cue Ball Deflection

PS:
      •    I know other authors and I tend to use lots of terminology, and I know not all readers are totally familiar
           with these terms. If you ever come across a word or phrase you do not fully understand, please refer
           to the online glossary at drdavepoolinfo.com.

Dr. Dave is a PBIA Master Instructor, Dean of the Billiard University, and author of the book: The
Illustrated Principles of Pool and Billiards and numerous instructional DVD series, all available at:
DrDaveBilliards.com.

Billiards Digest                                         4                                                October 2025
===== END DOCUMENT =====
